French Baroque music composer Michel Richard Delalande (1657–1726), pen in hand People composing music in 2013 using electronic keyboards and computers "Composition" is the act or practice of creating a song, an instrumental music piece, a work with both singing and instruments, or another type of music. In many cultures, including Western classical music, the act of composing also includes the creation of music notation , such as a sheet music "score", which is then performed by the composer or by other singers or musicians. In popular music and traditional music, the act of composing, which is typically called songwriting, may involve the creation of a basic outline of the song, called the lead sheet , which sets out the melody , lyrics and chord progression . In classical music, the composer typically orchestrates his or her own compositions, but in musical theatre and in pop music, songwriters may hire an arranger to do the orchestration. In some cases, a songwriter may not use notation at all, and instead, compose the song in her mind and then play or record it from memory. In jazz and popular music, notable recordings by influential performers are given the weight that written scores play in classical music. [72] [73] Even when music is notated relatively precisely, as in classical music, there are many decisions that a performer has to make, because notation does not specify all of the elements of music precisely. The process of deciding how to perform music that has been previously composed and notated is termed "interpretation". Different performers' interpretations of the same work of music can vary widely, in terms of the tempos that are chosen and the playing or singing style or phrasing of the melodies. Composers and songwriters who present their own music are interpreting their songs, just as much as those who perform the music of others. The standard body of choices and techniques present at a given time and a given place is referred to as performance practice , whereas interpretation is generally used to mean the individual choices of a performer. [74] Although a musical composition often uses musical notation and has a single author, this is not always the case. A work of music can have multiple composers, which often occurs in popular music when a band collaborates to write a song, or in musical theatre, when one person writes the melodies, a second person writes the lyrics, and a third person orchestrates the songs. In some styles of music, such as the blues , a composer/songwriter may create, perform and record new songs or pieces without ever writing them down in music notation. A piece of music can also be composed with words, images, or computer programs that explain or notate how the singer or musician should create musical sounds. Examples range from avant-garde music that uses graphic notation , to text compositions such as Aus den sieben Tagen , to computer programs that select sounds for musical pieces. Music that makes heavy use of randomness and chance is called aleatoric music , [75] and is associated with contemporary composers active in the 20th century, such as John Cage , Morton Feldman , and Witold Lutosławski . A commonly known example of chance-based music is the sound of wind chimes jingling in a breeze. The study of composition has traditionally been dominated by examination of methods and practice of Western classical music, but the definition of composition is broad enough to include the creation of popular music and traditional music songs and instrumental pieces as well as spontaneously improvised works like those of free jazz performers and African percussionists such as Ewe drummers . Performance Chinese Naxi musicians Assyrians playing zurna and Davul , instruments that go back thousands of years Performance is the physical expression of music, which occurs when a song is sung or piano piece, guitar melody, symphony, drum beat or other musical part is played. In classical music, a work is written in music notation by a composer and then performed once the composer is satisfied with its structure and instrumentation. However, as it gets performed, the interpretation of a song or piece can evolve and change. In classical music, instrumental performers, singers or conductors may gradually make changes to the phrasing or tempo of a piece. In popular and traditional music, the performers have more freedom to make changes to the form of a song or piece. As such, in popular and traditional music styles, even when a band plays a cover song , they can make changes such as adding a guitar solo or inserting an introduction. [76] A performance can either be planned out and rehearsed (practiced)—which is the norm in classical music, jazz big bands , and many popular music styles–or improvised over a chord progression (a sequence of chords), which is the norm in small jazz and blues groups. Rehearsals of orchestras, concert bands and choirs are led by a conductor. Rock, blues and jazz bands are usually led by the bandleader. A rehearsal is a structured repetition of a song or piece by the performers until it can be sung or played correctly and, if it is a song or piece for more than one musician, until the parts are together from a rhythmic and tuning perspective. Many cultures have strong traditions of solo performance (in which one singer or instrumentalist performs), such as in Indian classical music, and in the Western art-music tradition. Other cultures, such as in Bali , include strong traditions of group performance. All cultures include a mixture of both, and performance may range from improvised solo playing to highly planned and organized performances such as the modern classical concert, religious processions, classical music festivals or music competitions . Chamber music , which is music for a small ensemble with only one or a few of each type of instrument, is often seen as more intimate than large symphonic works. [77] Improvisation Main article: Musical improvisation Musical improvisation is the creation of spontaneous music, often within (or based on) a pre-existing harmonic framework, chord progression , or riffs . Improvisers use the notes of the chord, various scales that are associated with each chord, and chromatic ornaments and passing tones which may be neither chord tones nor from the typical scales associated with a chord. Musical improvisation can be done with or without preparation. Improvisation is a major part of some types of music, such as blues , jazz , and jazz fusion , in which instrumental performers improvise solos, melody lines, and accompaniment parts. [78] In the Western art music tradition, improvisation was an important skill during the Baroque era and during the Classical era. In the Baroque era, performers improvised ornaments, and basso continuo keyboard players improvised chord voicings based on figured bass notation. As well, the top soloists were expected to be able to improvise pieces such as preludes . In the Classical era, solo performers and singers improvised virtuoso cadenzas during concerts. However, in the 20th and early 21st century, as "common practice" Western art music performance became institutionalized in symphony orchestras, opera houses, and ballets, improvisation has played a smaller role, as more and more music was notated in scores and parts for musicians to play. At the same time, some 20th and 21st century art music composers have increasingly included improvisation in their creative work. In Indian classical music , improvisation is a core component and an essential criterion of performances. Art and entertainment Khatia Buniatishvili playing a grand piano Music is composed and performed for many purposes, ranging from aesthetic pleasure, religious or ceremonial purposes, or as an entertainment product for the marketplace. When music was only available through sheet music scores, such as during the Classical and Romantic eras, music lovers would buy the sheet music of their favourite pieces and songs so that they could perform them at home on the piano. With the advent of the phonograph , records of popular songs, rather than sheet music became the dominant way that music lovers would enjoy their favourite songs. With the advent of home tape recorders in the 1980s and digital music in the 1990s, music lovers could make tapes or playlists of favourite songs and take them with them on a portable cassette player or MP3 player. Some music lovers create mix tapes of favourite songs, which serve as a "self-portrait, a gesture of friendship, prescription for an ideal party... [and] an environment consisting solely of what is most ardently loved". [79] Amateur musicians can compose or perform music for their own pleasure and derive income elsewhere. Professional musicians are employed by institutions and organisations, including armed forces (in marching bands , concert bands and popular music groups), religious institutions, symphony orchestras, broadcasting or film production companies, and music schools . Professional musicians sometimes work as freelancers or session musicians , seeking contracts and engagements in a variety of settings. There are often many links between amateur and professional musicians. Beginning amateur musicians take lessons with professional musicians. In community settings, advanced amateur musicians perform with professional musicians in a variety of ensembles such as community concert bands and community orchestras. A distinction is often made between music performed for a live audience and music that is performed in a studio so that it can be recorded and distributed through the music retail system or the broadcasting system. However, there are also many cases where a live performance in front of an audience is also recorded and distributed. Live concert recordings are popular in both classical music and in popular music forms such as rock, where illegally taped live concerts are prized by music lovers. In the jam band scene, live, improvised jam sessions are preferred to studio recordings. [80] Notation Main article: Musical notation Sheet music is a written representation of music. Homorhythmic (i.e., hymn -style) arrangement of the traditional " Adeste Fideles " in standard two-staff format for mixed voices. play ⓘ Music notation typically means the written expression of music notes and rhythms on paper using symbols. When music is written down, the pitches and rhythm of the music, such as the notes of a melody , are notated. Music notation often provides instructions on how to perform the music. For example, the sheet music for a song may state the song is a "slow blues" or a "fast swing", which indicates the tempo and the genre. To read notation, a person must have an understanding of music theory , harmony and the performance practice associated with a particular song or piece's genre. Written notation varies with the style and period of music. Nowadays, notated music is produced as sheet music or, for individuals with computer scorewriter programs, as an image on a computer screen . In ancient times, music notation was put onto stone or clay tablets. [37] To perform music from notation, a singer or instrumentalist requires an understanding of the rhythmic and pitch elements embodied in the symbols and the performance practice that is associated with a piece of music or genre. In genres requiring musical improvisation , the performer often plays from music where only the chord changes and form of the song are written, requiring the performer to have a great understanding of the music's structure, harmony and the styles of a particular genre e.g., jazz or country music . In Western art music, the most common types of written notation are scores, which include all the music parts of an ensemble piece, and parts, which are the music notation for the individual performers or singers. In popular music, jazz, and blues, the standard musical notation is the lead sheet , which notates the melody, chords, lyrics (if it is a vocal piece), and structure of the music. Fake books are also used in jazz; they may consist of lead sheets or simply chord charts, which permit rhythm section members to improvise an accompaniment part to jazz songs. Scores and parts are also used in popular music and jazz, particularly in large ensembles such as jazz " big bands ." In popular music, guitarists and electric bass players often read music notated in tablature (often abbreviated as "tab"), which indicates the location of the notes to be played on the instrument using a diagram of the guitar or bass fingerboard. Tablature was used in the Baroque era to notate music for the lute , a stringed, fretted instrument. [81] Oral and aural tradition Many types of music, such as traditional blues and folk music were not written down in sheet music ; instead, they were originally preserved in the memory of performers, and the songs were handed down orally , from one musician or singer to another, or aurally, in which a performer learns a song " by ear ". When the composer of a song or piece is no longer known, this music is often classified as "traditional" or as a "folk song". Different musical traditions have different attitudes towards how and where to make changes to the original source material, from quite strict, to those that demand improvisation or modification to the music. A culture's history and stories may also be passed on by ear through song. [82] Elements Main article: Elements of music Music has many different fundamentals or elements. Depending on the definition of "element" being used, these can include pitch, beat or pulse, tempo, rhythm, melody, harmony, texture, style, allocation of voices, timbre or color, dynamics, expression, articulation, form, and structure. The elements of music feature prominently in the music curriculums of Australia, the UK, and the US. All three curriculums identify pitch, dynamics, timbre, and texture as elements, but the other identified elements of music are far from universally agreed upon. Below is a list of the three official versions of the "elements of music": Australia: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics and expression, rhythm, form and structure. [83] UK: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics, duration, tempo, structure. [84] USA: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics, rhythm, form, harmony, style/articulation. [85] In relation to the UK curriculum, in 2013 the term: "appropriate musical notations " was added to their list of elements and the title of the list was changed from the "elements of music" to the "inter-related dimensions of music". The inter-related dimensions of music are listed as: pitch, duration, dynamics, tempo, timbre, texture, structure, and appropriate musical notations. [86] The phrase "the elements of music" is used in a number of different contexts. The two most common contexts can be differentiated by describing them as the "rudimentary elements of music" and the "perceptual elements of music". [n 4] Pitch Main article: Pitch (music) Pitch is an aspect of a sound that we can hear, reflecting whether one musical sound, note, or tone is "higher" or "lower" than another musical sound, note, or tone. We can talk about the highness or lowness of pitch in the more general sense, such as the way a listener hears a piercingly high piccolo note or whistling tone as higher in pitch than a deep thump of a bass drum . We also talk about pitch in the precise sense associated with musical melodies , basslines and chords . Precise pitch can only be determined in sounds that have a frequency that is clear and stable enough to distinguish from noise. For example, it is much easier for listeners to discern the pitch of a single note played on a piano than to try to discern the pitch of a crash cymbal that is struck. [91] Melody The melody to the traditional song " Pop Goes the Weasel " play ⓘ A melody, also called a "tune", is a series of pitches (notes) sounding in succession (one after the other), often in a rising and falling pattern. The notes of a melody are typically created using pitch systems such as scales or modes . Melodies also often contain notes from the chords used in the song. The melodies in simple folk songs and traditional songs may use only the notes of a single scale, the scale associated with the tonic note or key of a given song. For example, a folk song in the key of C (also referred to as C major) may have a melody that uses only the notes of the C major scale (the individual notes C, D, E, F, G, A, B, and C; these are the " white notes " on a piano keyboard. On the other hand, Bebop -era jazz from the 1940s and contemporary music from the 20th and 21st centuries may use melodies with many chromatic notes (i.e., notes in addition to the notes of the major scale; on a piano, a chromatic scale would include all the notes on the keyboard, including the "white notes" and "black notes" and unusual scales, such as the whole tone scale (a whole tone scale in the key of C would contain the notes C, D, E, F♯, G♯ and A♯). A low musical line played by bass instruments, such as double bass, electric bass, or tuba , is called a bassline . [92] Harmony Main article: Harmony A player performing a chord (combination of many different notes ) on a guitar Harmony refers to the "vertical" sounds of pitches in music, which means pitches that are played or sung together at the same time to create a chord . Usually, this means the notes are played at the same time, although harmony may also be implied by a melody that outlines a harmonic structure (i.e., by using melody notes that are played one after the other, outlining the notes of a chord). In music written using the system of major-minor tonality ("keys"), which includes most classical music written from 1600 to 1900 and most Western pop, rock, and traditional music, the key of a piece determines the "home note" or tonic to which the piece generally resolves, and the character (e.g. major or minor) of the scale in use. Simple classical pieces and many pop and traditional music songs are written so that all the music is in a single key. More complex Classical, pop, and traditional music songs and pieces may have two keys (and in some cases three or more keys). Classical music from the Romantic era (written from about 1820–1900) often contains multiple keys, [93] as does jazz , especially Bebop jazz from the 1940s, in which the key or "home note" of a song may change every four bars or even every two bars. [94] Rhythm Main article: Rhythm Rhythm is the arrangement of sounds and silences in time. Meter animates time in regular pulse groupings, called measures or bars , which in Western classical, popular, and traditional music often group notes in sets of two (e.g., 2/4 time), three (e.g., 3/4 time, also known as Waltz time, or 3/8 time), or four (e.g., 4/4 time). Meters are made easier to hear because songs and pieces often (but not always) place an emphasis on the first beat of each grouping. Notable exceptions exist, such as the backbeat used in much Western pop and rock, in which a song that uses a measure that consists of four beats (called 4/4 time or common time ) will have accents on beats two and four, which are typically performed by the drummer on the snare drum , a loud and distinctive-sounding percussion instrument. In pop and rock, the rhythm parts of a song are played by the rhythm section , which includes chord-playing instruments (e.g., electric guitar, acoustic guitar, piano, or other keyboard instruments), a bass instrument (typically electric bass or for some styles such as jazz and bluegrass , double bass) and a drum kit player. [95] Texture Main article: Texture (music) Musical texture is the overall sound of a piece of music or song. The texture of a piece or song is determined by how the melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials are combined in a composition, thus determining the overall nature of the sound in a piece. Texture is often described in regard to the density, or thickness, and range, or width, between lowest and highest pitches, in relative terms as well as more specifically distinguished according to the number of voices, or parts, and the relationship between these voices (see common types below). For example, a thick texture contains many 'layers' of instruments. One layer can be a string section or another brass. The thickness is affected by the amount and the richness of the instruments. [96] Texture is commonly described according to the number of and relationship between parts or lines of music: monophony : a single melody (or "tune") with neither instrumental accompaniment nor a harmony part . A mother singing a lullaby to her baby would be an example. heterophony : two or more instruments or singers playing/singing the same melody, but with each performer slightly varying the rhythm or speed of the melody or adding different ornaments to the melody. Two bluegrass fiddlers playing the same traditional fiddle tune together will typically each vary the melody by some degree and each add different ornaments. polyphony : multiple independent melody lines that interweave together, which are sung or played at the same time. Choral music written in the Renaissance music era was typically written in this style. A round , which is a song such as " Row, Row, Row Your Boat ", which different groups of singers all start to sing at a different time, is an example of polyphony. homophony : a clear melody supported by chordal accompaniment . Most Western popular music songs from the 19th century onward are written in this texture. Music that contains a large number of independent parts (e.g., a double concerto accompanied by 100 orchestral instruments with many interweaving melodic lines) is generally said to have a "thicker" or "denser" texture than a work with few parts (e.g., a solo flute melody accompanied by a single cello). Timbre Main article: Timbre Spectrogram of the first second of an E9 suspended chord played on a Fender Stratocaster guitar. Below is the E9 suspended chord audio: Timbre, sometimes called "color" or "tone color" is the quality or sound of a voice or instrument. [97] Timbre is what makes a particular musical sound different from another, even when they have the same pitch and loudness. For example, a 440 Hz A note sounds different when it is played on oboe , piano, violin, or electric guitar. Even if different players of the same instrument play the same note, their notes might sound different due to differences in instrumental technique (e.g., different embouchures ), different types of accessories (e.g., mouthpieces for brass players, reeds for oboe and bassoon players) or strings made out of different materials for string players (e.g., gut strings versus steel strings ). Even two instrumentalists playing the same note on the same instrument (one after the other) may sound different due to different ways of playing the instrument (e.g., two string players might hold the bow differently). The physical characteristics of sound that determine the perception of timbre include the spectrum , envelope , and overtones of a note or musical sound. For electric instruments developed in the 20th century, such as electric guitar, electric bass and electric piano , the performer can also change the tone by adjusting equalizer controls , tone controls on the instrument, and by using electronic effects units such as distortion pedals. The tone of the electric Hammond organ is controlled by adjusting drawbars . Expression Expressive qualities are those elements in music that create change in music without changing the main pitches or substantially changing the rhythms of the melody and its accompaniment. Performers, including singers and instrumentalists, can add musical expression to a song or piece by adding phrasing , by adding effects such as vibrato (with voice and some instruments, such as guitar, violin, brass instruments, and woodwinds), dynamics (the loudness or softness of piece or a section of it), tempo fluctuations (e.g., ritardando or accelerando , which are, respectively slowing down and speeding up the tempo), by adding pauses or fermatas on a cadence , and by changing the articulation of the notes (e.g., making notes more pronounced or accented, by making notes more legato , which means smoothly connected, or by making notes shorter). Expression is achieved through the manipulation of pitch (such as inflection, vibrato, slides etc.), volume (dynamics, accent, tremolo etc.), duration (tempo fluctuations, rhythmic changes, changing note duration such as with legato and staccato, etc.), timbre (e.g. changing vocal timbre from a light to a resonant voice) and sometimes even texture (e.g. doubling the bass note for a richer effect in a piano piece). Expression therefore can be seen as a manipulation of all elements to convey "an indication of mood, spirit, character etc." [98] and as such cannot be included as a unique perceptual element of music, [99] although it can be considered an important rudimentary element of music. Form Sheet music notation for the chorus (refrain) of the Christmas song " Jingle Bells " Jingle Bells refrain vector.mid ⓘ In music, form describes the overall structure or plan of a song or piece of music, [100] and it describes the layout of a composition as divided into sections. [101] In the early 20th century, Tin Pan Alley songs and Broadway musical songs were often in AABA thirty-two-bar form , in which the A sections repeated the same eight bar melody (with variation) and the B section provided a contrasting melody or harmony for eight bars. From the 1960s onward, Western pop and rock songs are often in verse-chorus form , which comprises a sequence of verse and chorus (" refrain ") sections, with new lyrics for most verses and repeating lyrics for the choruses. Popular music often makes use of strophic form , sometimes in conjunction with the twelve bar blues . [102] In the tenth edition of The Oxford Companion to Music , Percy Scholes defines musical form as "a series of strategies designed to find a successful mean between the opposite extremes of unrelieved repetition and unrelieved alteration." [103] Examples of common forms of Western music include the fugue , the invention , sonata-allegro , canon , strophic , theme and variations , and rondo . Scholes states that European classical music had only six stand-alone forms: simple binary, simple ternary, compound binary, rondo, air with variations, and fugue (although musicologist Alfred Mann emphasized that the fugue is primarily a method of composition that has sometimes taken on certain structural conventions. [104] ) Where a piece cannot readily be broken into sectional units (though it might borrow some form from a poem, story or programme ), it is said to be through-composed . Such is often the case with a fantasia , prelude , rhapsody , etude (or study), symphonic poem , Bagatelle , impromptu or similar composition. [105] Professor Charles Keil classified forms and formal detail as "sectional, developmental, or variational." [106] Philosophy Main article: Philosophy of music The Woman in Red by Giovanni Boldini The philosophy of music is the study of fundamental questions regarding music and has connections with questions in metaphysics and aesthetics . Questions include: What is the definition of music ? (What are the necessary and sufficient conditions for classifying something as music?) What is the relationship between music and mind? What does music history reveal to us about the world? What is the connection between music and emotions ? What is meaning in relation to music? In ancient times, such as with the Ancient Greeks , the aesthetics of music explored the mathematical and cosmological dimensions of rhythmic and harmonic organization. In the 18th century, focus shifted to the experience of hearing music, and thus to questions about its beauty and human enjoyment ( plaisir and jouissance ) of music. The origin of this philosophic shift is sometimes attributed to Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten in the 18th century, followed by Immanuel Kant . Through their writing, the ancient term 'aesthetics', meaning sensory perception , received its present-day connotation. In the 2000s, philosophers have tended to emphasize issues besides beauty and enjoyment. For example, music's capacity to express emotion has been foregrounded. [107] In the 20th century, important contributions were made by Peter Kivy , Jerrold Levinson , Roger Scruton , and Stephen Davies . However, many musicians, music critics , and other non-philosophers have contributed to the aesthetics of music. In the 19th century, a significant debate arose between Eduard Hanslick , a music critic and musicologist , and composer Richard Wagner regarding whether music can express meaning. Harry Partch and some other musicologists , such as Kyle Gann , have studied and tried to popularize microtonal music and the usage of alternate musical scales . Modern composers like La Monte Young , Rhys Chatham and Glenn Branca paid much attention to a scale called just intonation . [108] [109] [110] It is often thought that music has the ability to affect our emotions , intellect , and psychology ; it can assuage our loneliness or incite our passions. The philosopher Plato suggests in The Republic that music has a direct effect on the soul. Therefore, he proposes that in the ideal regime music would be closely regulated by the state (Book VII). [111] In Ancient China, the philosopher Confucius believed that music and rituals or rites are interconnected and harmonious with nature; he stated that music was the harmonization of heaven and earth, while the order was brought by the rites order, making them extremely crucial functions in society. [112] Psychology Main article: Music psychology Modern music psychology aims to explain and understand musical behavior and experience . [113] Research in this field and its subfields are primarily empirical ; their knowledge tends to advance on the basis of interpretations of data collected by systematic observation of and interaction with human participants . In addition to its focus on fundamental perceptions and cognitive processes, music psychology is a field of research with practical relevance for many areas, including music performance , composition , education , criticism , and therapy , as well as investigations of human aptitude , skill, intelligence , creativity, and social behavior . Neuroscience Main article: Neuroscience of music The primary auditory cortex is one of the main areas associated with superior pitch resolution. Cognitive neuroscience of music is the scientific study of brain-based mechanisms involved in the cognitive processes underlying music. These behaviours include music listening, performing, composing, reading, writing, and ancillary activities. It also is increasingly concerned with the brain basis for musical aesthetics and musical emotion. The field is distinguished by its reliance on direct observations of the brain, using such techniques as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), magnetoencephalography (MEG), electroencephalography (EEG), and positron emission tomography (PET). Cognitive musicology Main article: Cognitive musicology Cognitive musicology is a branch of cognitive science concerned with computationally modeling musical knowledge with the goal of understanding both music and cognition. [114] The use of computer models provides an exacting, interactive medium in which to formulate and test theories and has roots in artificial intelligence and cognitive science . [115] This interdisciplinary field investigates topics such as the parallels between language and music in the brain. Biologically inspired models of computation are often included in research, such as neural networks and evolutionary programs. [116] This field seeks to model how musical knowledge is represented, stored, perceived, performed, and generated. By using a well-structured computer environment, the systematic structures of these cognitive phenomena can be investigated. [117] Psychoacoustics Main article: Psychoacoustics Psychoacoustics is the scientific study of sound perception. More specifically, it is the branch of science studying the psychological and physiological responses associated with sound (including speech and music). It can be further categorized as a branch of psychophysics . Evolutionary musicology Main article: Evolutionary musicology Evolutionary musicology concerns the "origins of music, the question of animal song, selection pressures underlying music evolution", and "music evolution and human evolution". [118] It seeks to understand music perception and activity in the context of evolutionary theory . Charles Darwin speculated that music may have held an adaptive advantage and functioned as a protolanguage , [119] a view which has spawned several competing theories of music evolution. [120] [121] [ page needed ] [122] An alternate view sees music as a by-product of linguistic evolution ; a type of "auditory cheesecake" that pleases the senses without providing any adaptive function. [123] This view has been directly countered by numerous music researchers. [124] [125] [126] Cultural effects Main article: Culture in music cognition An individual's culture or ethnicity plays a role in their music cognition , including their preferences , emotional reaction , and musical memory . Musical preferences are biased toward culturally familiar musical traditions beginning in infancy, and adults' classification of the emotion of a musical piece depends on both culturally specific and universal structural features. [127] [128] Additionally, individuals' musical memory abilities are greater for culturally familiar music than for culturally unfamiliar music. [129] [130] Perceptual Since the emergence of the study of psychoacoustics in the 1930s, most lists of elements of music have related more to how we hear music than how we learn to play it or study it. C.E. Seashore, in his book Psychology of Music, [131] identified four "psychological attributes of sound". These were: "pitch, loudness, time, and timbre" (p. 3). He did not call them the "elements of music" but referred to them as "elemental components" (p. 2). Nonetheless, these elemental components link precisely with four of the most common musical elements: "Pitch" and "timbre" match exactly, "loudness" links with dynamics, and "time" links with the time-based elements of rhythm, duration, and tempo. This usage of the phrase "the elements of music" links more closely with Webster's New 20th Century Dictionary definition of an element as: "a substance which cannot be divided into a simpler form by known methods" [132] and educational institutions' lists of elements generally align with this definition as well. Although writers of lists of "rudimentary elements of music" can vary their lists depending on their personal (or institutional) priorities, the perceptual elements of music should consist of an established (or proven) list of discrete elements which can be independently manipulated to achieve an intended musical effect. It seems at this stage that there is still research to be done in this area. A slightly different way of approaching the identification of the elements of music, is to identify the "elements of sound " as: pitch , duration , loudness , timbre , sonic texture and spatial location , [133] and then to define the "elements of music" as: sound, structure, and artistic intent. [133] Sociological aspects Main article: Sociomusicology Song dynasty (960–1279) painting, Night Revels of Han Xizai, showing Chinese musicians entertaining guests at a party in a 10th-century household Ethnographic studies demonstrate that music is a participatory, community-based activity. [134] [135] Music is experienced by individuals in a range of social settings from being alone, to attending a large concert, forming a music community , which cannot be understood as a function of individual will or accident; it includes both commercial and non-commercial participants with a shared set of common values. Musical performances take different forms in different cultures and socioeconomic milieus. In Europe and North America, there was a divide between what types of music were viewed as " high culture " and " low culture ." "High culture" included Baroque, Classical, Romantic, and modern-era symphonies, concertos, and solo works, and are typically heard in formal concerts in concert halls and churches, with the audience sitting quietly. Other types of music—including jazz, blues, soul , and country —are often performed in bars, nightclubs, and theatres, where the audience may drink, dance and cheer. Until the 20th century, the division between "high" and "low" musical forms was accepted as a valid distinction that separated out "art music", from popular music heard in bars and dance halls. Musicologists, such as David Brackett, note a "redrawing of high-low cultural-aesthetic boundaries" in the 20th century. [136] And, "when industry and public discourses link categories of music with categories of people, they tend to conflate stereotypes with actual listening communities." [136] Stereotypes can be based on socioeconomic standing, or social class, of the performers or audience of the different types of music. When composers introduce styles of music that break with convention, there can be strong resistance from academics and others. Late-period Beethoven string quartets, Stravinsky ballet scores, serialism , bebop , hip hop , punk rock , and electronica were controversial and criticised, when they were first introduced. Such themes are examined in the sociology of music, sometimes called sociomusicology , which is pursued in departments of sociology, media studies, or music, and is closely related to ethnomusicology . Role of women 19th-century composer and pianist Clara Schumann Women have played a major role in music throughout history, as composers, songwriters, instrumental performers , singers, conductors, music scholars , music educators , music critics / music journalists and other musical professions. In the 2010s, while women comprise a significant proportion of popular music and classical music singers, and a significant proportion of songwriters (many of them being singer-songwriters), there are few women record producers, rock critics and rock instrumentalists. Although there have been a huge number of women composers in classical music, from the medieval period to the present day, women composers are significantly underrepresented in the commonly performed classical music repertoire , music history textbooks and music encyclopedias; for example, in the Concise Oxford History of Music, Clara Schumann is one of the few female composers who is mentioned. Women comprise a significant proportion of instrumental soloists in classical music and the percentage of women in orchestras is increasing. A 2015 article on concerto soloists in major Canadian orchestras, however, indicated that 84% of the soloists with the Montreal Symphony Orchestra were men. In 2012, women still made up just 6% of the top-ranked Vienna Philharmonic orchestra. Women are less common as instrumental players in popular music genres such as rock and heavy metal , although there have been a number of notable female instrumentalists and all-female bands . Women are particularly underrepresented in extreme metal genres. [137] In the 1960s pop-music scene, "[l]ike most aspects of the...music business, [in the 1960s,] songwriting was a male-dominated field. Though there were plenty of female singers on the radio, women ...were primarily seen as consumers:... Singing was sometimes an acceptable pastime for a girl, but playing an instrument, writing songs, or producing records simply wasn't done." [138] Young women "...were not socialized to see themselves as people who create [music]." [138] Women are also underrepresented in orchestral conducting, music criticism/music journalism, music producing , and sound engineering . While women were discouraged from composing in the 19th century, and there are few women musicologists , women became involved in music education "...to such a degree that women dominated [this field] during the later half of the 19th century and well into the 20th century." [139] According to Jessica Duchen, a music writer for London's The Independent , women musicians in classical music are "...too often judged for their appearances, rather than their talent" and they face pressure "...to look sexy onstage and in photos." [140] Duchen states that while "[t]here are women musicians who refuse to play on their looks,...the ones who do tend to be more materially successful." [140] According to the UK's Radio 3 editor, Edwina Wolstencroft, the music industry has long been open to having women in performance or entertainment roles, but women are much less likely to have positions of authority, such as being the conductor of an orchestra . [141] In popular music, while there are many women singers recording songs, there are very few women behind the audio console acting as music producers, the individuals who direct and manage the recording process. [142] One of the most recorded artists is Asha Bhosle , an Indian singer best known as a playback singer in Hindi cinema. [143] Media and technology Further information: Computer music and Music technology Compact Disc Digital Audio (CD-DA) revolutionized audio music formatting. It allowed for music to be played portably without the need to rewind a series of tape. The CD surpassed LP sales in 1988, and cassette tapes in 1991. By 1999, the CD accounted for 87.9% of the entire market share in regard to music sales. [144] Since the 20th century, live music can be broadcast over the radio, television or the Internet, or recorded and listened to on a CD player or MP3 player. In the early 20th century (in the late 1920s), as talking pictures emerged in the early 20th century, with their prerecorded musical tracks, an increasing number of moviehouse orchestra musicians found themselves out of work. [145] During the 1920s, live musical performances by orchestras, pianists, and theater organists were common at first-run theaters. [146] With the coming of the talking motion pictures, those featured performances were largely eliminated. The American Federation of Musicians (AFM) took out newspaper advertisements protesting the replacement of live musicians with mechanical playing devices. One 1929 ad that appeared in the Pittsburgh Press features an image of a can labeled "Canned Music / Big Noise Brand / Guaranteed to Produce No Intellectual or Emotional Reaction Whatever" [147] Sometimes, live performances incorporate prerecorded sounds. For example, a disc jockey uses disc records for scratching , and some 20th-century works have a solo for an instrument or voice that is performed along with music that is prerecorded onto a tape. Some pop bands use recorded backing tracks . Computers and many keyboards can be programmed to produce and play Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) music. Audiences can also become performers by participating in karaoke , an activity of Japanese origin centered on a device that plays voice-eliminated versions of well-known songs. Most karaoke machines also have video screens that show lyrics to songs being performed; performers can follow the lyrics as they sing over the instrumental tracks. Music production in the 2000s using a digital audio workstation (DAW) with an electronic keyboard and a multi-monitor set-up The advent of the Internet and widespread high-speed broadband access has transformed the experience of music, partly through the increased ease of access to recordings of music via streaming video and vastly increased choice of music for consumers. Another effect of the Internet arose with online communities and social media websites like YouTube and Facebook, a social networking service . These sites make it easier for aspiring singers and amateur bands to distribute videos of their songs, connect with other musicians, and gain audience interest. Professional musicians also use YouTube as a free publisher of promotional material. YouTube users, for example, no longer only download and listen to MP3s, but also actively create their own. According to Don Tapscott and Anthony D. Williams , in their book Wikinomics , there has been a shift from a traditional consumer role to what they call a " prosumer " role, a consumer who both creates content and consumes. Manifestations of this in music include the production of mashes , remixes , and music videos by fans. [148] Education Non-institutional A Suzuki violin recital with students of varying ages The incorporation of music into general education from preschool to post secondary education , is common in North America and Europe. Involvement in playing and singing music is thought to teach basic skills such as concentration, counting , listening, and cooperation while also promoting understanding of language , improving the ability to recall information, and creating an environment more conducive to learning in other areas. [149] In elementary schools, children often learn to play instruments such as the recorder , sing in small choirs, and learn about the history of Western art music and traditional music. Some elementary school children also learn about popular music styles. In religious schools, children sing hymns and other religious music. In secondary schools (and less commonly in elementary schools), students may have the opportunity to perform in some types of musical ensembles, such as choirs (a group of singers), marching bands , concert bands , jazz bands, or orchestras. In some school systems, music lessons on how to play instruments may be provided. Some students also take private music lessons after school with a singing teacher or instrument teacher. Amateur musicians typically learn basic musical rudiments (e.g., learning about musical notation for musical scales and rhythms) and beginner- to intermediate-level singing or instrument-playing techniques. At the university level, students in most arts and humanities programs can receive credit for taking a few music courses, which typically take the form of an overview course on the history of music , or a music appreciation course that focuses on listening to music and learning about different musical styles. In addition, most North American and European universities have some types of musical ensembles that students in arts and humanities are able to participate in, such as choirs, marching bands, concert bands, or orchestras. The study of Western art music is increasingly common outside of North America and Europe, such as the Indonesian Institute of the Arts in Yogyakarta , Indonesia , or the classical music programs that are available in Asian countries such as South Korea, Japan, and China. At the same time, Western universities and colleges are widening their curriculum to include music of non-Western cultures, such as the music of Africa or Bali (e.g. Gamelan music). Institutional Manhattan School of Music professor and professional double bass player Timothy Cobb teaching a bass lesson in the late 2000s. His bass has a low C extension with a metal "machine" with buttons for playing the pitches on the extension. People aiming to become professional musicians, singers, composers, songwriters, music teachers and practitioners of other music-related professions such as music history professors, sound engineers , and so on study in specialized post-secondary programs offered by colleges, universities and music conservatories . Some institutions that train individuals for careers in music offer training in a wide range of professions, as is the case with many of the top U.S. universities, which offer degrees in music performance (including singing and playing instruments), music history, music theory, music composition, music education (for individuals aiming to become elementary or high school music teachers) and, in some cases, conducting. On the other hand, some small colleges may only offer training in a single profession (e.g., sound recording ). While most university and conservatory music programs focus on training students in classical music, there are universities and colleges that train musicians for careers as jazz or popular music musicians and composers, with notable U.S. examples including the Manhattan School of Music and the Berklee College of Music . Two schools in Canada which offer professional jazz training are McGill University and Humber College . Individuals aiming at careers in some types of music, such as heavy metal music , country music or blues are unlikely to become professionals by completing degrees or diplomas. Instead, they typically learn about their style of music by singing or playing in bands (often beginning in amateur bands, cover bands and tribute bands ), studying recordings on DVD and the Internet, and working with already-established professionals in their style of music, either through informal mentoring or regular music lessons . Since the 2000s, the increasing popularity and availability of Internet forums and YouTube "how-to" videos have enabled singers and musicians from metal, blues and similar genres to improve their skills. Many pop, rock and country singers train informally with vocal coaches and voice teachers . [150] [151] Academic study Main article: Musicology Musicology, the academic study of music, is studied in universities and music conservatories. The earliest definitions from the 19th century defined three sub-disciplines of musicology: systematic musicology , historical musicology, and comparative musicology or ethnomusicology . In 2010-era scholarship, one is more likely to encounter a division into music theory , music history , and ethnomusicology. Research in musicology has often been enriched by cross-disciplinary work, for example in the field of psychoacoustics . The study of music of non-Western cultures, and cultural study of music, is called ethnomusicology. Students can pursue study of musicology, ethnomusicology, music history, and music theory through different types of degrees, including bachelor's, master's and PhD. [152] [153] [154] Music theory Main article: Music theory Music theory is the study of music, generally in a highly technical manner outside of other disciplines. More broadly it refers to any study of music, usually related in some form with compositional concerns, and may include mathematics, physics , and anthropology . What is most commonly taught in beginning music theory classes are guidelines to write in the style of the common practice period , or tonal music . Theory, even of music of the common practice period, may take other forms. [155] Musical set theory is the application of mathematical set theory to music, first applied to atonal music . Speculative music theory, contrasted with analytic music theory, is devoted to the analysis and synthesis of music materials, for example tuning systems , generally as preparation for composition. [156] Zoomusicology Main article: Zoomusicology Zoomusicology is the study of the music of non-human animals, or the musical aspects of sounds produced by non-human animals. As George Herzog (1941) asked, "do animals have music?" François-Bernard Mâche 's Musique, mythe, nature, ou les Dauphins d'Arion (1983), a study of "ornitho-musicology" using a technique of Nicolas Ruwet 's Language, musique, poésie (1972) paradigmatic segmentation analysis , shows that bird songs are organised according to a repetition-transformation principle. Jean-Jacques Nattiez (1990), argues that "in the last analysis, it is a human being who decides what is and is not musical, even when the sound is not of human origin. If we acknowledge that sound is not organised and conceptualised (that is, made to form music) merely by its producer, but by the mind that perceives it, then music is uniquely human." [157] Ethnomusicology Ethnomusicologist Frances Densmore recording Blackfoot chief Mountain Chief for the Bureau of American Ethnology (1916) In the West, much of the history of music that is taught deals with the Western civilization's art music, known as classical music. The history of music in non-Western cultures (" world music " or the field of "ethnomusicology") is also taught in Western universities. This includes the documented classical traditions of Asian countries outside the influence of Western Europe, as well as the folk or indigenous music of various other cultures. Popular or folk styles of music in non-Western countries varied from culture to culture, and period to period. Different cultures emphasised different instruments , techniques, singing styles and uses for music. Music has been used for entertainment, ceremonies, rituals, religious purposes and for practical and artistic communication. Non-Western music has also been used for propaganda purposes, as was the case with Chinese opera during the Cultural Revolution . There is a host of music classifications for non-Western music, many of which are caught up in the argument over the definition of music . Among the largest of these is the division between classical music (or "art" music), and popular music (or commercial music – including non-Western styles of rock, country , and pop music-related styles). Some genres do not fit neatly into one of these "big two" classifications, (such as folk music , world music , or jazz -related music). As world cultures have come into greater global contact , their indigenous musical styles have often merged with other styles, which produces new styles. For example, the United States bluegrass style contains elements from Anglo - Irish , Scottish , Irish, German and African instrumental and vocal traditions, which were able to fuse in the United States' multi-ethnic " melting pot " society. Some types of world music contain a mixture of non-Western indigenous styles with Western pop music elements. Genres of music are determined as much by tradition and presentation as by the actual music. Some works, like George Gershwin 's Rhapsody in Blue , are claimed by both jazz and classical music, while Gershwin's Porgy and Bess and Leonard Bernstein 's West Side Story are claimed by both opera and the Broadway musical tradition. Many music festivals for non-Western music, include bands and singers from a particular musical genre, such as world music. [158] [159] Indian music , for example, is one of the oldest and longest living types of music, and is still widely heard and performed in South Asia, as well as internationally (especially since the 1960s). Indian music has mainly three forms of classical music, Hindustani , Carnatic , and Dhrupad styles. It has also a large repertoire of styles, which involve only percussion music such as the talavadya performances famous in South India . Therapy Main article: Music therapy A music therapist from a "Blues in the Schools" program plays harmonica with a US Navy sailor at a Naval Therapy Center. Music therapy is an interpersonal process in which a trained therapist uses music and all of its facets—physical, emotional, mental, social, aesthetic, and spiritual—to help clients to improve or maintain their health. In some instances, the client's needs are addressed directly through music; in others they are addressed through the relationships that develop between the client and therapist. Music therapy is used with individuals of all ages and with a variety of conditions, including: psychiatric disorders, medical problems, physical disabilities, sensory impairments, developmental disabilities, substance abuse issues, communication disorders, interpersonal problems, and aging. It is also used to improve learning, build self-esteem, reduce stress, support physical exercise , and facilitate a host of other health-related activities. Music therapists may encourage clients to sing, play instruments, create songs, or do other musical activities. In the 10th century, the philosopher Al-Farabi described how vocal music can stimulate the feelings and souls of listeners. [160] Music has long been used to help people deal with their emotions. In the 17th century, the scholar Robert Burton 's The Anatomy of Melancholy argued that music and dance were critical in treating mental illness , especially melancholia . [161] He noted that music has an "excellent power ...to expel many other diseases" and he called it "a sovereign remedy against despair and melancholy." He pointed out that in Antiquity, Canus, a Rhodian fiddler, used music to "make a melancholy man merry, ...a lover more enamoured, a religious man more devout." [162] [163] [164] In the Ottoman Empire , mental illnesses were treated with music. [165] In November 2006, Michael J. Crawford and his colleagues also found that music therapy helped schizophrenic patients. [166] [167] See also
mouthparts Three-part body Insects have a segmented body supported by an exoskeleton , the hard outer covering made mostly of chitin . The body is organized into three interconnected units : the head , thorax and abdomen . The head supports a pair of sensory antennae , a pair of compound eyes , zero to three simple eyes (or ocelli ) and three sets of variously modified appendages that form the mouthparts . The thorax carries the three pairs of legs and up to two pairs of wings . The abdomen contains most of the digestive, respiratory, excretory and reproductive structures. [8] Segmentation Further information: Insect morphology The head is enclosed in a hard, heavily sclerotized , unsegmented head capsule , which contains most of the sensing organs, including the antennae, compound eyes, ocelli, and  mouthparts. [40] The thorax is composed of three sections named (from front to back) the prothorax , mesothorax and metathorax . The prothorax carries the first pair of legs. The mesothorax carries the second pair of legs and the front wings. The metathorax carries the third pair of legs and the hind wings. [8] [40] The abdomen is the largest part of the insect, typically with 11–12 segments, and is less strongly sclerotized than the head or thorax. Each segment of the abdomen has sclerotized upper and lower plates (the tergum and sternum), connected to adjacent sclerotized parts by membranes. Each segment carries a pair of spiracles . [40] Exoskeleton Main article: Arthropod cuticle The outer skeleton, the cuticle , is made up of two layers: the epicuticle, a thin and waxy water-resistant outer layer without chitin , and a lower layer, the thick chitinous procuticle. The procuticle has two layers: an outer exocuticle and an inner endocuticle. The tough and flexible endocuticle is built from numerous layers of fibrous chitin and proteins, criss-crossing each other in a sandwich pattern, while the exocuticle is rigid and sclerotized. [41] [42] As an adaptation to life on land, insects have an enzyme that uses atmospheric oxygen to harden their cuticle, unlike crustaceans which use heavy calcium compounds for the same purpose. This makes the insect exoskeleton a lightweight material. [43] Internal systems Main article: Insect physiology Nervous The nervous system of an insect consists of a brain and a ventral nerve cord . The head capsule is made up of six fused segments, each with either a pair of ganglia , or a cluster of nerve cells outside of the brain. The first three pairs of ganglia are fused into the brain, while the three following pairs are fused into a structure of three pairs of ganglia under the insect's esophagus , called the subesophageal ganglion . [44] The thoracic segments have one ganglion on each side, connected into a pair per segment. This arrangement is also seen in the first eight segments of the abdomen. Many insects have fewer ganglia than this. [45] Insects are capable of learning. [46] Digestive An insect uses its digestive system to extract nutrients and other substances from the food it consumes. [47] There is extensive variation among different orders , life stages , and even castes in the digestive system of insects. [48] The gut runs lengthwise through the body. It has three sections, with paired salivary glands and salivary reservoirs. [49] By moving its mouthparts the insect mixes its food with saliva. [50] [51] Some insects, like flies , expel digestive enzymes onto their food to break it down, but most insects digest their food in the gut. [52] The foregut is lined with cuticule as protection from tough food. It includes the mouth , pharynx, and crop which stores food. [53] Digestion starts in the mouth with enzymes in the saliva. Strong muscles in the pharynx pump fluid into the mouth, lubricating the food, and enabling certain insects to feed on blood or from the xylem and phloem transport vessels of plants. [54] Once food leaves the crop, it passes to the midgut , where the majority of digestion takes place. Microscopic projections, microvilli , increase the surface area of the wall to absorb nutrients. [55] In the hindgut , undigested food particles are joined by uric acid to form fecal pellets; most of the water is absorbed, leaving a dry pellet to be eliminated. Insects may have one to hundreds of Malpighian tubules . These remove nitrogenous wastes from the hemolymph of the insect and regulate osmotic balance. Wastes and solutes are emptied directly into the alimentary canal, at the junction between the midgut and hindgut. [56] Reproductive Main article: Insect reproductive system The reproductive system of female insects consist of a pair of ovaries , accessory glands, one or more spermathecae to store sperm, and ducts connecting these parts. The ovaries are made up of a variable number of egg tubes, ovarioles . Female insects make eggs, receive and store sperm, manipulate sperm from different males, and lay eggs. Accessory glands produce substances to maintain sperm and to protect the eggs. They can produce glue and protective substances for coating eggs, or tough coverings for a batch of eggs called oothecae . [57] For males, the reproductive system consists of one or two testes , suspended in the body cavity by tracheae . The testes contain sperm tubes or follicles in a membranous sac. These connect to a duct that leads to the outside. The terminal portion of the duct may be sclerotized to form the intromittent organ , the aedeagus . [58] Respiratory Main article: Respiratory system of insects The tube-like heart (green) of the mosquito Anopheles gambiae extends horizontally across the body, interlinked with the diamond-shaped wing muscles (also green) and surrounded by pericardial cells (red). Blue depicts cell nuclei . Insect respiration is accomplished without lungs . Instead, insects have a system of internal tubes and sacs through which gases either diffuse or are actively pumped, delivering oxygen directly to tissues that need it via their tracheae and tracheoles. In most insects, air is taken in through paired spiracles , openings on the sides of the abdomen and thorax. The respiratory system limits the size of insects. As insects get larger, gas exchange via spiracles becomes less efficient, and thus the heaviest insect currently weighs less than 100 g. However, with increased atmospheric oxygen levels, as were present in the late Paleozoic , larger insects were possible, such as dragonflies with wingspans of more than two feet (60 cm). [59] Gas exchange patterns in insects range from continuous and diffusive ventilation, to discontinuous . [60] [61] [62] [63] Circulatory Further information: Insect physiology § Circulatory system Because oxygen is delivered directly to tissues via tracheoles, the circulatory system is not used to carry oxygen, and is therefore greatly reduced. The insect circulatory system is open; it has no veins or arteries , and instead consists of little more than a single, perforated dorsal tube that pulses peristaltically . This dorsal blood vessel is divided into two sections: the heart and aorta. The dorsal blood vessel circulates the hemolymph , arthropods' fluid analog of blood , from the rear of the body cavity forward. [64] [65] Hemolymph is composed of plasma in which hemocytes are suspended. Nutrients, hormones, wastes, and other substances are transported throughout the insect body in the hemolymph. Hemocytes include many types of cells that are important for immune responses, wound healing, and other functions. Hemolymph pressure may be increased by muscle contractions or by swallowing air into the digestive system to aid in molting. [66] Sensory Further information: Insect physiology § Sensory organs Most insects have a pair of large compound eyes and other sensory organs such as antennae able to detect movements and chemical stimuli on their heads. Many insects possess numerous specialized sensory organs able to detect stimuli including limb position ( proprioception ) by campaniform sensilla , light, water , chemicals (senses of taste and smell ), sound, and heat. [67] Some insects such as bees can perceive ultraviolet wavelengths, or detect polarized light , while the antennae of male moths can detect the pheromones of female moths over distances of over a kilometer. [68] There is a trade-off between visual acuity and chemical or tactile acuity, such that most insects with well-developed eyes have reduced or simple antennae, and vice versa. Insects perceive sound by different mechanisms, such as thin vibrating membranes ( tympana ). [69] Insects were the earliest organisms to produce and sense sounds. Hearing has evolved independently at least 19 times in different insect groups. [70] Most insects, except some cave crickets , are able to perceive light and dark. Many have acute vision capable of detecting small and rapid movements. The eyes may include simple eyes or ocelli as well as larger compound eyes . Many species can detect light in the infrared , ultraviolet and visible light wavelengths, with color vision. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that UV-green-blue trichromacy existed from at least the Devonian period, some 400 million years ago. [71] The individual lenses in compound eyes are immobile, but fruit flies have photoreceptor cells underneath each lens which move rapidly in and out of focus, in a series of movements called photoreceptor microsaccades. This gives them, and possibly many other insects, a much clearer image of the world than previously assumed. [72] An insect's sense of smell is via chemical receptors , usually on the antennae and the mouthparts. These detect both airborne volatile compounds and odorants on surfaces, including pheromones from other insects and compounds released by food plants. Insects use olfaction to locate mating partners, food, and places to lay eggs, and to avoid predators. It is thus an extremely important sense, enabling insects to discriminate between thousands of volatile compounds. [73] Some insects are capable of magnetoreception ; ants and bees navigate using it both locally (near their nests) and when migrating. [74] The Brazilian stingless bee detects magnetic fields using the hair-like sensilla on its antennae. [75] [76] Reproduction and development Butterflies mating The majority of insects hatch from eggs . The fertilization and development takes place inside the egg, enclosed by a shell ( chorion ) that consists of maternal tissue. In contrast to eggs of other arthropods, most insect eggs are drought resistant. This is because inside the chorion two additional membranes develop from embryonic tissue, the amnion and the serosa . This serosa secretes a cuticle rich in chitin that protects the embryo against desiccation. [77] Some species of insects, like aphids and tsetse flies, are ovoviviparous : their eggs develop entirely inside the female, and then hatch immediately upon being laid. [78] Some other species, such as in the cockroach genus Diploptera , are viviparous , gestating inside the mother and born alive . [79] Some insects, like parasitoid wasps , are polyembryonic , meaning that a single fertilized egg divides into many separate embryos. [80] Insects may be univoltine , bivoltine or multivoltine, having one, two or many broods in a year. [81] Aphid giving birth to live female young by parthenogenesis from unfertilized eggs Other developmental and reproductive variations include haplodiploidy , polymorphism , paedomorphosis or peramorphosis , sexual dimorphism , parthenogenesis, and more rarely hermaphroditism . [82] [83] In haplodiploidy , which is a type of sex-determination system , the offspring's sex is determined by the number of sets of chromosomes an individual receives. This system is typical in bees and wasps. [84] Some insects are parthenogenetic , meaning that the female can reproduce and give birth without having the eggs fertilized by a male . Many aphids undergo a cyclical form of parthenogenesis in which they alternate between one or many generations of asexual and sexual reproduction. [85] [86] In summer, aphids are generally female and parthenogenetic; in the autumn, males may be produced for sexual reproduction. Other insects produced by parthenogenesis are bees, wasps and ants; in their haplodiploid system, diploid females spawn many females and a few haploid males. [78] Metamorphosis Metamorphosis in insects is the process of development that converts young to adults. There are two forms of metamorphosis: incomplete and complete. Incomplete Main article: Hemimetabolism Incomplete metamorphosis in a locust with multiple instars . Egg is not shown. The largest specimen is adult. Hemimetabolous insects, those with incomplete metamorphosis, change gradually after hatching from the egg by undergoing a series of molts through stages called instars , until the final, adult , stage is reached. An insect molts when it outgrows its exoskeleton, which does not stretch and would otherwise restrict the insect's growth. The molting process begins as the insect's epidermis secretes a new epicuticle inside the old one. After this new epicuticle is secreted, the epidermis releases a mixture of enzymes that digests the endocuticle and thus detaches the old cuticle. When this stage is complete, the insect makes its body swell by taking in a large quantity of water or air, which makes the old cuticle split along predefined weaknesses where the old exocuticle was thinnest. [87] [88] Complete Main article: Holometabolism Life-cycle of butterfly, undergoing complete metamorphosis from egg through caterpillar larvae to pupa and adult Holometabolism , or complete metamorphosis, is where the insect changes in four stages, an egg or embryo , a larva , a pupa and the adult or imago . In these species, an egg hatches to produce a larva, which is generally worm-like in form. This can be eruciform (caterpillar-like), scarabaeiform (grub-like), campodeiform (elongated, flattened and active), elateriform (wireworm-like) or vermiform (maggot-like). The larva grows and eventually becomes a pupa, a stage marked by reduced movement. There are three types of pupae : obtect, exarate or coarctate. Obtect pupae are compact, with the legs and other appendages enclosed. Exarate pupae have their legs and other appendages free and extended. Coarctate pupae develop inside the larval skin. [89] Insects undergo considerable change in form during the pupal stage, and emerge as adults. Butterflies are well-known for undergoing complete metamorphosis; most insects use this life cycle. Some insects have evolved this system to hypermetamorphosis . Complete metamorphosis is a trait of the most diverse insect group, the Endopterygota . [82] Communication Insects that produce sound can generally hear it. Most insects can hear only a narrow range of frequencies related to the frequency of the sounds they can produce. Mosquitoes can hear up to 2 kilohertz . [90] Certain predatory and parasitic insects can detect the characteristic sounds made by their prey or hosts, respectively. Likewise, some nocturnal moths can perceive the ultrasonic emissions of bats , which helps them avoid predation . [91] Light production A few insects, such as Mycetophilidae (Diptera) and the beetle families Lampyridae , Phengodidae , Elateridae and Staphylinidae are bioluminescent . The most familiar group are the fireflies , beetles of the family Lampyridae. Some species are able to control this light generation to produce flashes. The function varies with some species using them to attract mates, while others use them to lure prey. Cave dwelling larvae of Arachnocampa (Mycetophilidae, fungus gnats) glow to lure small flying insects into sticky strands of silk. [92] Some fireflies of the genus Photuris mimic the flashing of female Photinus species to attract males of that species, which are then captured and devoured. [93] The colors of emitted light vary from dull blue (Orfelia fultoni, Mycetophilidae) to the familiar greens and the rare reds (Phrixothrix tiemanni, Phengodidae). [94] Sound production Insects make sounds mostly by mechanical action of appendages. In grasshoppers and crickets, this is achieved by stridulation . Cicadas make the loudest sounds among the insects by producing and amplifying sounds with special modifications to their body to form tymbals and associated musculature. The African cicada Brevisana brevis has been measured at 106.7 decibels at a distance of 50 cm (20 in). [95] Some insects, such as the Helicoverpa zea moths, hawk moths and Hedylid butterflies, can hear ultrasound and take evasive action when they sense that they have been detected by bats. [96] [97] Some moths produce ultrasonic clicks that warn predatory bats of their unpalatability (acoustic aposematism ), [98] while some palatable moths have evolved to mimic these calls (acoustic Batesian mimicry ). [99] The claim that some moths can jam bat sonar has been revisited. Ultrasonic recording and high-speed infrared videography of bat-moth interactions suggest the palatable tiger moth really does defend against attacking big brown bats using ultrasonic clicks that jam bat sonar. [100] Several unidentified grasshoppers stridulating Problems playing this file? See media help . Very low sounds are produced in various species of Coleoptera , Hymenoptera , Lepidoptera , Mantodea and Neuroptera . These low sounds are produced by the insect's movement, amplified by stridulatory structures on the insect's muscles and joints; these sounds can be used to warn or communicate with other insects. Most sound-making insects also have tympanal organs that can perceive airborne sounds. Some hemipterans , such as the water boatmen , communicate via underwater sounds. [101] Cricket in garage with familiar call Communication using surface-borne vibrational signals is more widespread among insects because of size constraints in producing air-borne sounds. [102] Insects cannot effectively produce low-frequency sounds, and high-frequency sounds tend to disperse more in a dense environment (such as foliage ), so insects living in such environments communicate primarily using substrate-borne vibrations. [103] Some species use vibrations for communicating, such as to attract mates as in the songs of the shield bug Nezara viridula . [104] Vibrations can also be used to communicate between species; lycaenid caterpillars, which form a mutualistic association with ants communicate with ants in this way. [105] The Madagascar hissing cockroach has the ability to press air through its spiracles to make a hissing noise as a sign of aggression; [106] the death's-head hawkmoth makes a squeaking noise by forcing air out of their pharynx when agitated, which may also reduce aggressive worker honey bee behavior when the two are close. [107] Chemical communication Social insects such as ants have multiple types of pheromonal glands, producing different semiochemicals for communication with other insects . [108] Many insects have evolved chemical means for communication . These semiochemicals are often derived from plant metabolites including those meant to attract, repel and provide other kinds of information. Pheromones are used for attracting mates of the opposite sex, for aggregating conspecific individuals of both sexes, for deterring other individuals from approaching, to mark a trail, and to trigger aggression in nearby individuals. Allomones benefit their producer by the effect they have upon the receiver. Kairomones benefit their receiver instead of their producer. Synomones benefit the producer and the receiver. While some chemicals are targeted at individuals of the same species, others are used for communication across species. The use of scents is especially well-developed in social insects. [108] Cuticular hydrocarbons are nonstructural materials produced and secreted to the cuticle surface to fight desiccation and pathogens . They are important, too, as pheromones, especially in social insects. [109] Social behavior A cathedral mound created by eusocial mound-building termites . Honey bee 's figure-eight waggle dance . An orientation 45° to the right of ‘up' on the comb indicates food 45° to the right of the sun. The dancer's rapid waggling blurs her abdomen. Social insects , such as termites , ants and many bees and wasps , are eusocial . [110] They live together in such large well-organized colonies of genetically similar individuals that they are sometimes considered superorganisms . In particular, reproduction is largely limited to a queen caste ; other females are workers , prevented from reproducing by worker policing . Honey bees have evolved a system of abstract symbolic communication where a behavior is used to represent and convey specific information about the environment. In this communication system, called dance language , the angle at which a bee dances represents a direction relative to the sun, and the length of the dance represents the distance to be flown. [111] Bumblebees too have some social communication behaviors. Bombus terrestris , for example, more rapidly learns about visiting unfamiliar, yet rewarding flowers, when they can see a conspecific foraging on the same species. [112] Only insects that live in nests or colonies possess fine-scale spatial orientation. Some can navigate unerringly to a single hole a few millimeters in diameter among thousands of similar holes, after a trip of several kilometers. In philopatry , insects that hibernate are able to recall a specific location up to a year after last viewing the area of interest. [113] A few insects seasonally migrate large distances between different geographic regions, as in the continent-wide monarch butterfly migration . [114] Care of young Eusocial insects build nests, guard eggs, and provide food for offspring full-time. Most insects, however, lead short lives as adults, and rarely interact with one another except to mate or compete for mates. A small number provide parental care , where they at least guard their eggs, and sometimes guard their offspring until adulthood, possibly even feeding them. Many wasps and bees construct a nest or burrow, store provisions in it, and lay an egg upon those provisions, providing no further care. [115] Locomotion Main article: Insect flight Insects such as hoverflies are capable of rapid and agile flight . Insects are the only group of invertebrates to have developed flight. The ancient groups of insects in the Palaeoptera, the dragonflies, damselflies and mayflies, operate their wings directly by paired muscles attached to points on each wing base that raise and lower them. This can only be done at a relatively slow rate. All other insects, the Neoptera, have indirect flight , in which the flight muscles cause rapid oscillation of the thorax: there can be more wingbeats than nerve impulses commanding the muscles. One pair of flight muscles is aligned vertically, contracting to pull the top of the thorax down, and the wings up. The other pair runs longitudinally, contracting to force the top of the thorax up and the wings down. [116] [117] Most insects gain aerodynamic lift by creating a spiralling vortex at the leading edge of the wings. [118] Small insects like thrips with tiny feathery wings gain lift using the clap and fling mechanism; the wings are clapped together and pulled apart, flinging vortices into the air at the leading edges and at the wingtips. [119] [120] The evolution of insect wings has been a subject of debate ; it  has been suggested they came from modified gills, flaps on the spiracles, or an appendage, the epicoxa, at the base of the legs. [121] More recently, entomologists have favored evolution of wings from lobes of the notum , of the pleuron , or more likely both. [122] In the Carboniferous age, the dragonfly-like Meganeura had as much as a 50 cm (20 in) wide wingspan. The appearance of gigantic insects is consistent with high atmospheric oxygen at that time, as the respiratory system of insects constrains their size. [123] The largest flying insects today are much smaller, with the largest wingspan belonging to the white witch moth ( Thysania agrippina ), at approximately 28 cm (11 in). [124] Unlike birds , small insects are swept along by the prevailing winds [125] although many larger insects migrate . Aphids are transported long distances by low-level jet streams . [126] Walking Further information: Walking § Insects Spatial and temporal stepping pattern of walking desert ants performing an alternating tripod gait. Recording rate: 500 fps, Playback rate: 10 fps. Many adult insects use six legs for walking, with an alternating tripod gait . This allows for rapid walking with a stable stance; it has been studied extensively in cockroaches and ants . For the first step, the middle right leg and the front and rear left legs are in contact with the ground and move the insect forward, while the front and rear right leg and the middle left leg are lifted and moved forward to a new position. When they touch the ground to form a new stable triangle, the other legs can be lifted and brought forward in turn. [127] The purest form of the tripedal gait is seen in insects moving at high speeds. However, this type of locomotion is not rigid and insects can adapt a variety of gaits. For example, when moving slowly, turning, avoiding obstacles, climbing or slippery surfaces, four (tetrapodal) or more feet ( wave-gait ) may be touching the ground. [128] Cockroaches are among the fastest insect runners and, at full speed, adopt a bipedal run. More sedate locomotion is seen in the well- camouflaged stick insects ( Phasmatodea ). A small number of species such as Water striders can move on the surface of water; their claws are recessed in a special groove, preventing the claws from piercing the water's surface film. [62] The ocean-skaters in the genus Halobates even live on the surface of open oceans, a habitat that has few insect species. [129] Swimming Main article: Aquatic insects The backswimmer Notonecta glauca underwater, showing its paddle-like hindleg adaptation A large number of insects live either part or the whole of their lives underwater. In many of the more primitive orders of insect, the immature stages are aquatic. In some groups, such as water beetles , the adults too are aquatic. [62] Many of these species are adapted for under-water locomotion. Water beetles and water bugs have legs adapted into paddle-like structures. Dragonfly naiads use jet propulsion, forcibly expelling water out of their rectal chamber. [130] Other insects such as the rove beetle Stenus emit pygidial gland surfactant secretions that reduce surface tension; this enables them to move on the surface of water by Marangoni propulsion . [131] [132] Ecology Main article: Insect ecology Insects play many critical roles in ecosystems , including soil turning and aeration, dung burial, pest control, pollination and wildlife nutrition. [133] For instance, termites modify the environment around their nests, encouraging grass growth; [134] many beetles are scavengers ; dung beetles recycle biological materials into forms useful to other organisms . [135] [136] Insects are responsible for much of the process by which topsoil is created. [137] Defense Reduvius personatus , the masked hunter bug nymph , camouflages itself with sand grains to avoid predators . Insects are mostly small, soft bodied, and fragile compared to larger lifeforms. The immature stages are small, move slowly or are immobile, and so all stages are exposed to predation and parasitism . Insects accordingly employ multiple defensive strategies , including camouflage , mimicry , toxicity and active defense. [138] Many insects rely on camouflage to avoid being noticed by their predators or prey. [139] It is common among leaf beetles and weevils that feed on wood or vegetation. [138] Stick insects mimic the forms of sticks and leaves. [140] Many insects use mimicry to deceive predators into avoiding them. In Batesian mimicry , edible species, such as of hoverflies (the mimics), gain a survival advantage by resembling inedible species (the models). [138] [141] In Müllerian mimicry , inedible species, such as of wasps and bees, resemble each other so as to reduce the sampling rate by predators who need to learn that those insects are inedible. Heliconius butterflies, many of which are toxic, form Müllerian complexes, advertising their inedibility. [142] Chemical defense is common among Coleoptera and Lepidoptera, usually being advertised by bright warning colors ( aposematism ), as in the monarch butterfly . As larvae, they obtain their toxicity by sequestering chemicals from the plants they eat into their own tissues. Some manufacture their own toxins. Predators that eat poisonous butterflies and moths may vomit violently, learning not to eat insects with similar markings; this is the basis of Müllerian mimicry. [143] Some ground beetles of the family Carabidae actively defend themselves, spraying chemicals from their abdomen with great accuracy, to repel predators. [138] Pollination European honey bee carrying pollen in a pollen basket back to the hive Pollination is the process by which pollen is transferred in the reproduction of plants, thereby enabling fertilisation and sexual reproduction . [144] Most flowering plants require an animal to do the transportation. The majority of pollination is by insects . [145] Because insects usually receive benefit for the pollination in the form of energy rich nectar it is a mutualism . The various flower traits, such as bright colors and pheromones that coevolved with their pollinators, have been called pollination syndromes , though around one third of flowers cannot be assigned to a single syndrome. [146] Parasitism Further information: Parasitism and Parasitoid wasp Many insects are parasitic . The largest group, with over 100,000 species [147] and perhaps over a million, [148] consists of a single clade of parasitoid wasps among the Hymenoptera. [149] These are parasites of other insects, eventually killing their hosts. [147] Some are hyper-parasites, as their hosts are other parasitoid wasps. [147] [150] Several groups of insects can be considered as either micropredators or external parasites ; [151] [152] for example, many hemipteran bugs have piercing and sucking mouthparts, adapted for feeding on plant sap, [153] [154] while species in groups such as fleas , lice , and mosquitoes are hematophagous , feeding on the blood of animals. [152] A parasitoid wasp ovipositing into an aphid [155] Plant parasite or micropredator : a coreid bug sucking plant sap Human head-lice are directly transmitted obligate ectoparasites. Relationship to humans
Toggle the table of contents Video game From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Electronic game with user interface and visual feedback "Video Games" redirects here. For other uses, see Video Games (disambiguation) . "Computer game" redirects here. For PC games, see PC game . For other uses, see Computer game (disambiguation) . Video games are typically categorized according to their hardware platform , which traditionally includes arcade video games , console games , and computer (PC) games ; the latter also encompasses LAN games , online games , and browser games . More recently, the video game industry has expanded onto mobile gaming through mobile devices (such as smartphones and tablet computers ), virtual and augmented reality systems, and remote cloud gaming . Video games are also classified into a wide range of genres based on their style of gameplay and target audience . The first video game prototypes in the 1950s and 1960s were simple extensions of electronic games using video-like output from large, room-sized mainframe computers . The first consumer video game was the arcade video game Computer Space in 1971. In 1972 came the iconic hit game Pong and the first home console , the Magnavox Odyssey . The industry grew quickly during the "golden age" of arcade video games from the late 1970s to early 1980s but suffered from the crash of the North American video game market in 1983 due to loss of publishing control and saturation of the market. Following the crash, the industry matured, was dominated by Japanese companies such as Nintendo , Sega , and Sony , and established practices and methods around the development and distribution of video games to prevent a similar crash in the future, many of which continue to be followed. In the 2000s, the core industry centered on " AAA " games, leaving little room for riskier experimental games. Coupled with the availability of the Internet and digital distribution , this gave room for independent video game development (or " indie games ") to gain prominence into the 2010s. Since then, the commercial importance of the video game industry has been increasing. The emerging Asian markets and proliferation of smartphone games in particular are altering player demographics towards casual gaming and increasing monetization by incorporating games as a service . Today, video game development requires numerous interdisciplinary skills, vision , teamwork , and liaisons between different parties, including developers , publishers , distributors , retailers , hardware manufacturers, and other marketers, to successfully bring a game to its consumers. As of 2020 [update] , the global video game market had estimated annual revenues of US$159 billion across hardware, software, and services, which is three times the size of the global music industry and four times that of the film industry in 2019, [1] making it a formidable heavyweight across the modern entertainment industry . The video game market is also a major influence behind the electronics industry , where personal computer component, console, and peripheral sales, as well as consumer demands for better game performance, have been powerful driving factors for hardware design and innovation. Origins Tennis for Two (1958), an early analog computer game that used an oscilloscope for a display Early video games use interactive electronic devices with various display formats. The earliest example is from 1947—a " cathode-ray tube amusement device " was filed for a patent on 25 January 1947, by Thomas T. Goldsmith Jr. and Estle Ray Mann, and issued on 14 December 1948, as U.S. Patent 2455992. [2] Inspired by radar display technology, it consists of an analog device allowing a user to control the parabolic arc of a dot on the screen to simulate a missile being fired at targets, which are paper drawings fixed to the screen. [3] Other early examples include Christopher Strachey 's draughts game, the Nimrod computer at the 1951 Festival of Britain ; OXO , a tic-tac-toe computer game by Alexander S. Douglas for the EDSAC in 1952; Tennis for Two , an electronic interactive game engineered by William Higinbotham in 1958; and Spacewar! , written by Massachusetts Institute of Technology students Martin Graetz, Steve Russell , and Wayne Wiitanen's on a DEC PDP-1 computer in 1961. Each game has different means of display: NIMROD has a panel of lights to play the game of Nim , [4] OXO has a graphical display to play tic-tac-toe, [5] Tennis for Two has an oscilloscope to display a side view of a tennis court, [3] and Spacewar! has the DEC PDP-1's vector display to have two spaceships battle each other. [6] Nolan Bushnell in 2013 These preliminary inventions paved the way for the origins of video games today. Ralph H. Baer , while working at Sanders Associates in 1966, devised a control system to play a rudimentary game of table tennis on a television screen. With the company's approval, Baer built the prototype "Brown Box". Sanders patented Baer's inventions and licensed them to Magnavox , which commercialized it as the first home video game console , the Magnavox Odyssey , released in 1972. [3] [7] Separately, Nolan Bushnell and Ted Dabney , inspired by seeing Spacewar! running at Stanford University , devised a similar version running in a smaller coin-operated arcade cabinet using a less expensive computer. This was released as Computer Space , the first arcade video game , in 1971. [8] Bushnell and Dabney went on to form Atari, Inc. , and with Allan Alcorn , created their second arcade game in 1972, the hit ping pong -style Pong , which was directly inspired by the table tennis game on the Odyssey. Sanders and Magnavox sued Atari for infringement of Baer's patents, but Atari settled out of court, paying for perpetual rights to the patents. Following their agreement, Atari made a home version of Pong, which was released by Christmas 1975. [3] The success of the Odyssey and Pong, both as an arcade game and home machine, launched the video game industry. [9] [10] Both Baer and Bushnell have been titled "Father of Video Games" for their contributions. [11] [12] Terminology The term "video game" was developed to distinguish this class of electronic games that were played on some type of video display rather than on a teletype printer , audio speaker or similar device. [13] This also distinguished from many handheld electronic games like Merlin which commonly used LED lights for indicators but did not use these in combination for imaging purposes. [14] "Computer game" may also be used as a descriptor, as all these types of games essentially require the use of a computer processor, and in some cases, it is used interchangeably with "video game". [15] Particularly in the United Kingdom and Western Europe, this is common due to the historic relevance of domestically produced microcomputers. Other terms used include digital game, for example by the Australian Bureau of Statistics . [16] However, the term "computer game" can also be used to more specifically refer to games played primarily on personal computers or other type of flexible hardware systems (also known as a PC game ), as a way distinguish them from console games , arcade games or mobile games . [14] [13] Other terms such as "television game" or "telegame" had been used in the 1970s and early 1980s, particularly for the home gaming consoles that rely on connection to a television set . [17] In Japan, where consoles like the Odyssey were first imported and then made within the country by the large television manufacturers such as Toshiba and Sharp Corporation , such games are known as "TV games", or TV geemu or terebi geemu. [18] "Electronic game" may also be used to refer to video games, but this also incorporates devices like early handheld electronic games that lack any video output. [15] and the term "TV game" is still commonly used into the 21st century. [18] [19] The first appearance of the term "video game" emerged around 1973. The Oxford English Dictionary cited a 10 November 1973 BusinessWeek article as the first printed use of the term. [20] Though Bushnell believed the term came from a vending magazine review of Computer Space in 1971, [21] a review of the major vending magazines Vending Times and Cashbox showed that the term came much earlier, appearing first around March 1973 in these magazines in mass usage including by the arcade game manufacturers. As analyzed by video game historian Keith Smith, the sudden appearance suggested that the term had been proposed and readily adopted by those involved. This appeared to trace to Ed Adlum, who ran Cashbox's coin-operated section until 1972 and then later founded RePlay Magazine, covering the coin-op amusement field, in 1975. In a September 1982 issue of RePlay, Adlum is credited with first naming these games as "video games": "RePlay's Eddie Adlum worked at 'Cash Box' when 'TV games' first came out. The personalities in those days were Bushnell, his sales manager Pat Karns and a handful of other 'TV game' manufacturers like Henry Leyser and the McEwan brothers. It seemed awkward to call their products 'TV games', so borrowing a word from Billboard 's description of movie jukeboxes, Adlum started to refer to this new breed of amusement machine as 'video games.' The phrase stuck."[ citation needed ] Adlum explained in 1985 that up until the early 1970s, amusement arcades typically had non-video arcade games such as pinball machines and electro-mechanical games . With the arrival of video games in arcades during the early 1970s, there was initially some confusion in the arcade industry over what term should be used to describe the new games. He "wrestled with descriptions of this type of game," alternating between "TV game" and "television game" but "finally woke up one day" and said, "what the hell... video game!" [22] For many years, the traveling Videotopia exhibit served as the closest representation of such a vital resource. In addition to collecting home video game consoles, the Electronics Conservancy organization set out to locate and restore 400 antique arcade cabinets after realizing that the majority of these games had been destroyed and feared the loss of their historical significance. [23] Video games have significantly began to be seen in the real-world as a purpose to present history in a way of understanding the methodology and terms that are being compared. Researchers have looked at how historical representations affect how the public perceives the past, and digital humanists encourage historians to use video games as primary materials. [24] Video games, considering their past and age, have over time progressed as what a video game really means. Whether played through a monitor, TV, or a hand-held device, there are many ways that video games are being displayed for users to enjoy. People have drawn comparisons between flow-state-engaged video gamers and pupils in conventional school settings. In traditional, teacher-led classrooms, students have little say in what they learn, are passive consumers of the information selected by teachers, are required to follow the pace and skill level of the group (group teaching), and receive brief, imprecise, normative feedback on their work. [25] Video games, as they continue to develop into better graphic definition and genre's, create new terminology when something unknown tends to become known. Yearly, consoles are being created to compete against other brands with similar functioning features that tends to lead the consumer into which they'd like to purchase. Now, companies have moved towards games only the specific console can play to grasp the consumer into purchasing their product compared to when video games first began, there was little to no variety. In 1989, a console war begun with Nintendo, one of the biggest in gaming was up against target, Sega with their brand new Master System which, failed to compete, allowing the Nintendo Emulator System to be one of the most consumed product in the world. [26] More technology continued to be created, as the computer began to be used in people's houses for more than just office and daily use. Games began being implemented into computers and have progressively grown since then with coded robots to play against you. Early games like tic-tac-toe, solitaire, and Tennis for Two were great ways to bring new gaming to another system rather than one specifically meant for gaming. [27] Definition While many games readily fall into a clear, well-understood definition of video games, new genres and innovations in game development have raised the question of what are the essential factors of a video game that separate the medium from other forms of entertainment. The introduction of interactive films in the 1980s with games like Dragon's Lair , featured games with full motion video played off a form of media but only limited user interaction. [28] This had required a means to distinguish these games from more traditional board games that happen to also use external media, such as the Clue VCR Mystery Game which required players to watch VCR clips between turns. To distinguish between these two, video games are considered to require some interactivity that affects the visual display. [14] Most video games tend to feature some type of victory or winning conditions, such as a scoring mechanism or a final boss fight. The introduction of walking simulators ( adventure games that allow for exploration but lack any objectives) like Gone Home , and empathy games (video games that tend to focus on emotion) like That Dragon, Cancer brought the idea of games that did not have any such type of winning condition and raising the question of whether these were actually games. [29] These are still commonly justified as video games as they provide a game world that the player can interact with by some means. [30] The lack of any industry definition for a video game by 2021 was an issue during the case Epic Games v. Apple which dealt with video games offered on Apple's iOS App Store . Among concerns raised were games like Fortnite Creative and Roblox which created metaverses of interactive experiences, and whether the larger game and the individual experiences themselves were games or not in relation to fees that Apple charged for the App Store. Judge Yvonne Gonzalez Rogers , recognizing that there was yet an industry standard definition for a video game, established for her ruling that "At a bare minimum, videogames appear to require some level of interactivity or involvement between the player and the medium" compared to passive entertainment like film, music, and television, and "videogames are also generally graphically rendered or animated, as opposed to being recorded live or via motion capture as in films or television". [31] Rogers still concluded that what is a video game "appears highly eclectic and diverse". [31] Video game terminology See also: Glossary of video game terms Freedoom , a clone of the first-person shooter Doom . Common elements include a heads-up display along the bottom that includes the player's remaining health and ammunition. The gameplay experience varies radically between video games, but many common elements exist. Most games will launch into a title screen and give the player a chance to review options such as the number of players before starting a game. Most games are divided into levels which the player must work the avatar through, scoring points , collecting power-ups to boost the avatar's innate attributes, all while either using special attacks to defeat enemies or moves to avoid them. This information is relayed to the player through a type of on-screen user interface such as a heads-up display atop the rendering of the game itself. Taking damage will deplete their avatar's health , and if that falls to zero or if the avatar otherwise falls into an impossible-to-escape location, the player will lose one of their lives . Should they lose all their lives without gaining an extra life or "1-UP" , then the player will reach the " game over " screen. Many levels as well as the game's finale end with a type of boss character the player must defeat to continue on. In some games, intermediate points between levels will offer save points where the player can create a saved game on storage media to restart the game should they lose all their lives or need to stop the game and restart at a later time. These also may be in the form of a passage that can be written down and reentered at the title screen.[ citation needed ] Product flaws include software bugs which can manifest as glitches which may be exploited by the player; this is often the foundation of speedrunning a video game. These bugs, along with cheat codes , Easter eggs , and other hidden secrets that were intentionally added to the game can also be exploited. [32] [33] [34] [35] On some consoles, cheat cartridges allow players to execute these cheat codes, and user-developed trainers allow similar bypassing for computer software games. Both of which might make the game easier, give the player additional power-ups, or change the appearance of the game. [33] Components Arcade video game machines at the Sugoi arcade game hall in Malmi , Helsinki , Finland To distinguish from electronic games, a video game is generally considered to require a platform, the hardware which contains computing elements, to process player interaction from some type of input device and displays the results to a video output display. [36] Platform This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. ) Various gaming consoles at the Computer Games Museum in Berlin Video games require a platform, a specific combination of electronic components or computer hardware and associated software , to operate. [37] The term system is also commonly used. These platforms may include multiple brandsheld by platform holders , such as Nintendo or Sony, seeking to gain larger market shares. [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] Games are typically designed to be played on one or a limited number of platforms, and exclusivity to a platform or brand is used by platform holders as a competitive edge in the video game market. [43] However, games may be developed for alternative platforms than intended, which are described as ports or conversions. These also may be remasters - where most of the original game's source code is reused and art assets, models, and game levels are updated for modern systems – and remakes, where in addition to asset improvements, significant reworking of the original game and possibly from scratch is performed. [44] The list below is not exhaustive and excludes other electronic devices capable of playing video games such as PDAs and graphing calculators . PC games PC games involve a player interacting with a personal computer (PC) connected to a video monitor . [45] Personal computers are not dedicated game platforms, so there may be differences running the same game on different hardware. Also, the openness allows some features to developers like reduced software cost, [46] increased flexibility, increased innovation, emulation, creation of modifications or mods , open hosting for online gaming (in which a person plays a video game with people who are in a different household) and others. A gaming computer is a PC or laptop intended specifically for gaming, typically using high-performance, high-cost components. In additional to personal computer gaming, there also exist games that work on mainframe computers and other similarly shared systems, with users logging in remotely to use the computer. Home console The PlayStation 2 is the best-selling video game console , with over 155 million units sold. [47] A console game is played on a home console , a specialized electronic device that connects to a common television set or composite video monitor . Home consoles are specifically designed to play games using a dedicated hardware environment, giving developers a concrete hardware target for development and assurances of what features will be available, simplifying development compared to PC game development. Usually consoles only run games developed for it, or games from other platform made by the same company, but never games developed by its direct competitor, even if the same game is available on different platforms. It often comes with a specific game controller . Major console platforms include Xbox , PlayStation and Nintendo . Handheld console A handheld game console is a small, self-contained electronic device that is portable and can be held in a user's hands. It features the console, a small screen, speakers and buttons, joystick or other game controllers in a single unit. Like consoles, handhelds are dedicated platforms, and share almost the same characteristics. Handheld hardware usually is less powerful than PC or console hardware. Some handheld games from the late 1970s and early 1980s could only play one game. In the 1990s and 2000s, a number of handheld games used cartridges, which enabled them to be used to play many different games. The handheld console has waned in the 2010s as mobile device gaming has become a more dominant factor. Arcade video game A police-themed arcade game in which players use a light gun An arcade video game generally refers to a game played on an even more specialized type of electronic device that is typically designed to play only one game and is encased in a special, large coin-operated cabinet which has one built-in console, controllers (joystick, buttons, etc.), a CRT screen , and audio amplifier and speakers. Arcade games often have brightly painted logos and images relating to the theme of the game. While most arcade games are housed in a vertical cabinet, which the user typically stands in front of to play, some arcade games use a tabletop approach, in which the display screen is housed in a table-style cabinet with a see-through table top. With table-top games, the users typically sit to play. In the 1990s and 2000s, some arcade games offered players a choice of multiple games. In the 1980s, video arcades were businesses in which game players could use a number of arcade video games. In the 2010s, there are far fewer video arcades, but some movie theaters and family entertainment centers still have them. Browser game A browser game takes advantages of standardizations of technologies for the functionality of web browsers across multiple devices providing a cross-platform environment. These games may be identified based on the website that they appear, such as with Miniclip games. Others are named based on the programming platform used to develop them, such as Java and Flash games. Mobile game With the introduction of smartphones and tablet computers standardized on the iOS and Android operating systems, mobile gaming has become a significant platform. These games may use unique features of mobile devices that are not necessary present on other platforms, such as accelerometers , global positing information and camera devices to support augmented reality gameplay. Cloud gaming Cloud gaming requires a minimal hardware device, such as a basic computer, console, laptop, mobile phone or even a dedicated hardware device connected to a display with good Internet connectivity that connects to hardware systems by the cloud gaming provider. The game is computed and rendered on the remote hardware, using a number of predictive methods to reduce the network latency between player input and output on their display device. For example, the Xbox Cloud Gaming and PlayStation Now platforms use dedicated custom server blade hardware in cloud computing centers. Virtual reality Players using the PlayStation VR headsets in 2017 Virtual reality (VR) games generally require players to use a special head-mounted unit that provides stereoscopic screens and motion tracking to immerse a player within virtual environment that responds to their head movements. Some VR systems include control units for the player's hands as to provide a direct way to interact with the virtual world. VR systems generally require a separate computer, console, or other processing device that couples with the head-mounted unit. Emulation An emulator enables games from a console or otherwise different system to be run in a type of virtual machine on a modern system, simulating the hardware of the original and allows old games to be played. While emulators themselves have been found to be legal in United States case law, the act of obtaining the game software that one does not already own may violate copyrights. However, there are some official releases of emulated software from game manufacturers, such as Nintendo with its Virtual Console or Nintendo Switch Online offerings. Backward compatibility Backward compatibility is similar in nature to emulation in that older games can be played on newer platforms, but typically directly though hardware and build-in software within the platform. For example, the PlayStation 2 is capable of playing original PlayStation games simply by inserting the original game media into the newer console, while Nintendo's Wii could play GameCube titles as well in the same manner. Game media An unlabeled game cartridge for the Nintendo Entertainment System Early arcade games, home consoles, and handheld games were dedicated hardware units with the game's logic built into the electronic componentry of the hardware. Since then, most video game platforms are considered programmable, having means to read and play multiple games distributed on different types of media or formats. Physical formats include ROM cartridges , magnetic storage including magnetic-tape data storage and floppy discs , optical media formats including CD-ROM and DVDs , and flash memory cards. Furthermore digital distribution over the Internet or other communication methods as well as cloud gaming alleviate the need for any physical media. In some cases, the media serves as the direct read-only memory for the game, or it may be the form of installation media that is used to write the main assets to the player's platform's local storage for faster loading periods and later updates. Games can be extended with new content and software patches through either expansion packs which are typically available as physical media, or as downloadable content nominally available via digital distribution. These can be offered freely or can be used to monetize a game following its initial release. Several games offer players the ability to create user-generated content to share with others to play. Other games, mostly those on personal computers, can be extended with user-created modifications or mods that alter or add onto the game; these often are unofficial and were developed by players from reverse engineering of the game, but other games provide official support for modding the game. [48] Input device Main article: Game controller A North American Super NES game controller from the early 1990s Video game can use several types of input devices to translate human actions to a game. Most common are the use of game controllers like gamepads and joysticks for most consoles, and as accessories for personal computer systems along keyboard and mouse controls. Common controls on the most recent controllers include face buttons, shoulder triggers, analog sticks , and directional pads ("d-pads") . Consoles typically include standard controllers which are shipped or bundled with the console itself, while peripheral controllers are available as a separate purchase from the console manufacturer or third-party vendors. [49] Similar control sets are built into handheld consoles and onto arcade cabinets. Newer technology improvements have incorporated additional technology into the controller or the game platform, such as touchscreens and motion detection sensors that give more options for how the player interacts with the game. Specialized controllers may be used for certain genres of games, including racing wheels , light guns and dance pads . Digital cameras and motion detection can capture movements of the player as input into the game, which can, in some cases, effectively eliminate the control, and on other systems such as virtual reality, are used to enhance immersion into the game. Display and output Main article: Video game graphics Handheld units, like the Game Boy, include built-in output screens and sound speakers. By definition, all video games are intended to output graphics to an external video display, such as cathode-ray tube televisions, newer liquid-crystal display (LCD) televisions and built-in screens, projectors or computer monitors , depending on the type of platform the game is played on. Features such as color depth , refresh rate , frame rate , and screen resolution are a combination of the limitations of the game platform and display device and the program efficiency of the game itself. The game's output can range from fixed displays using LED or LCD elements, text-based games , two-dimensional and three-dimensional graphics, and augmented reality displays. The game's graphics are often accompanied by sound produced by internal speakers on the game platform or external speakers attached to the platform, as directed by the game's programming. This often will include sound effects tied to the player's actions to provide audio feedback, as well as background music for the game. Some platforms support additional feedback mechanics to the player that a game can take advantage of. This is most commonly haptic technology built into the game controller, such as causing the controller to shake in the player's hands to simulate a shaking earthquake occurring in game. Classifications Video games are frequently classified by a number of factors related to how one plays them. Genre See also: Gameplay Dustforce is representative of the platform game genre as its gameplay involves jumping between platforms. A video game, like most other forms of media, may be categorized into genres . However, unlike film or television which use visual or narrative elements, video games are generally categorized into genres based on their gameplay interaction, since this is the primary means which one interacts with a video game. [50] [51] [52] The narrative setting does not impact gameplay; a shooter game is still a shooter game, regardless of whether it takes place in a fantasy world or in outer space. [53] [54] An exception is the horror game genre, used for games that are based on narrative elements of horror fiction , the supernatural , and psychological horror . [55] Genre names are normally self-describing in terms of the type of gameplay, such as action game , role playing game , or shoot 'em up , though some genres have derivations from influential works that have defined that genre, such as roguelikes from Rogue , [56] Grand Theft Auto clones from Grand Theft Auto III , [57] and battle royale games from the film Battle Royale . [58] The names may shift over time as players, developers and the media come up with new terms; for example, first-person shooters were originally called "Doom clones" based on the 1993 game . [59] A hierarchy of game genres exist, with top-level genres like "shooter game" and "action game" that broadly capture the game's main gameplay style, and several subgenres of specific implementation, such as within the shooter game first-person shooter and third-person shooter . Some cross-genre types also exist that fall until multiple top-level genres such as action-adventure game . Mode A LAN party at the 2004 DreamHack with hundreds of players A video game's mode describes how many players can use the game at the same type. This is primarily distinguished by single-player video games and multiplayer video games . Within the latter category, multiplayer games can be played in a variety of ways, including locally at the same device, on separate devices connected through a local network such as LAN parties , or online via separate Internet connections. Most multiplayer games are based on competitive gameplay, but many offer cooperative and team-based options as well as asymmetric gameplay . Online games use server structures that can also enable massively multiplayer online games (MMOs) to support hundreds of players at the same time. A small number of video games are zero-player games , in which the player has very limited interaction with the game itself. These are most commonly simulation games where the player may establish a starting state and then let the game proceed on its own, watching the results as a passive observer, such as with many computerized simulations of Conway's Game of Life . [60] Types Most video games are intended for entertainment purposes. [36] Different game types include: Core games Core or hard-core games refer to the typical perception of video games, developed for entertainment purposes. These games typically require a fair amount of time to learn and master, in contrast to casual games, and thus are most appealing to gamers rather than a broader audience. Most of the AAA video game industry is based around the delivery of core games. [61] Casual games In contrast to core games, casual games are designed for ease of accessibility, simple to understand gameplay and quick to grasp rule sets, and aimed at mass market audience. They frequently support the ability to jump in and out of play on demand, such as during commuting or lunch breaks. Numerous browser and mobile games fall into the casual game area, and casual games often are from genres with low intensity game elements such as match three , hidden object , time management , and puzzle games. [62] Causal games frequently use social-network game mechanics, where players can enlist the help of friends on their social media networks for extra turns or moves each day. [63] Popular casual games include Tetris and Candy Crush Saga . More recent, starting in the late 2010s, are hyper-casual games which use even more simplistic rules for short but infinitely replayable games, such as Flappy Bird . [64] Educational games Education software has been used in homes and classrooms to help teach children and students, and video games have been similarly adapted for these reasons, all designed to provide a form of interactivity and entertainment tied to game design elements. There are a variety of differences in their designs and how they educate the user. These are broadly split between edutainment games that tend to focus on the entertainment value and rote learning but are unlikely to engage in critical thinking , and educational video games that are geared towards problem solving through motivation and positive reinforcement while downplaying the entertainment value. [65] Examples of educational games include The Oregon Trail and the Carmen Sandiego series. Further, games not initially developed for educational purposes have found their way into the classroom after release, such as that feature open worlds or virtual sandboxes like Minecraft , [66] or offer critical thinking skills through puzzle video games like SpaceChem . [67] Serious games Microsoft Flight Simulator is an example of a simulation game. Further extending from educational games, serious games are those where the entertainment factor may be augmented, overshadowed, or even eliminated by other purposes for the game. Game design is used to reinforce the non-entertainment purpose of the game, such as using video game technology for the game's interactive world, or gamification for reinforcement training. Educational games are a form of serious games, but other types of games include fitness games that incorporate significant physical exercise to help keep the player fit (such as Wii Fit ), simulator games that resemble flight simulators to pilot aircraft (such as Microsoft Flight Simulator ), advergames that are built around the advertising of a product (such as Pepsiman ), and newsgames aimed at conveying a specific advocacy message (such as NarcoGuerra ). [68] [69] Art games Although video games have been considered an art form on their own, games may be developed to try to purposely communicate a story or message, using the medium as a work of art. These art or arthouse games are designed to generate emotion and empathy from the player by challenging societal norms and offering critique through the interactivity of the video game medium. They may not have any type of win condition and are designed to let the player explore through the game world and scenarios. Most art games are indie games in nature, designed based on personal experiences or stories through a single developer or small team. Examples of art games include Passage , Flower , and That Dragon, Cancer . [70] [71] [72] Content rating Main article: Video game content rating system A typical ESRB rating label, listing the rating and specific content descriptors for Rabbids Go Home Video games can be subject to national and international content rating requirements. Like with film content ratings, video game ratings typing identify the target age group that the national or regional ratings board believes is appropriate for the player, ranging from all-ages, to a teenager-or-older, to mature, to the infrequent adult-only games. Most content review is based on the level of violence, both in the type of violence and how graphic it may be represented, and sexual content, but other themes such as drug and alcohol use and gambling that can influence children may also be identified. A primary identifier based on a minimum age is used by nearly all systems, along with additional descriptors to identify specific content that players and parents should be aware of. The regulations vary from country to country but generally are voluntary systems upheld by vendor practices, with penalty and fines issued by the ratings body on the video game publisher for misuse of the ratings. Among the major content rating systems include: Entertainment Software Rating Board (ESRB) that oversees games released in the United States. ESRB ratings are voluntary and rated along a E (Everyone), E10+ (Everyone 10 and older), T (Teen), M (Mature), and AO (Adults Only). Attempts to mandate video games ratings in the U.S. subsequently led to the landmark Supreme Court case, Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association in 2011 which ruled video games were a protected form of art, a key victory for the video game industry. [73] Pan European Game Information (PEGI) covering the United Kingdom, most of the European Union and other European countries, replacing previous national-based systems. The PEGI system uses content rated based on minimum recommended ages, which include 3+, 8+, 12+, 16+, and 18+. Australian Classification Board (ACB) oversees the ratings of games and other works in Australia, using ratings of G (General), PG (Parental Guidance), M (Mature), MA15+ (Mature Accompanied), R18+ (Restricted), and X (Restricted for pornographic material). ACB can also deny to give a rating to game (RC – Refused Classification). The ACB's ratings are enforceable by law, and importantly, games cannot be imported or purchased digitally in Australia if they have failed to gain a rating or were given the RC rating, leading to a number of notable banned games . Computer Entertainment Rating Organization (CERO) rates games for Japan. Their ratings include A (all ages), B (12 and older), C (15 and over), D (17 and over), and Z (18 and over). Additionally, the major content system provides have worked to create the International Age Rating Coalition (IARC), a means to streamline and align the content ratings system between different region, so that a publisher would only need to complete the content ratings review for one provider, and use the IARC transition to affirm the content rating for all other regions. Certain nations have even more restrictive rules related to political or ideological content. Within Germany, until 2018, the Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle (Entertainment Software Self-Regulation) would refuse to classify, and thus allow sale, of any game depicting Nazi imagery, and thus often requiring developers to replace such imagery with fictional ones. This ruling was relaxed in 2018 to allow for such imagery for "social adequacy" purposes that applied to other works of art. [74] China's video game segment is mostly isolated from the rest of the world due to the government's censorship, and all games published there must adhere to strict government review, disallowing content such as smearing the image of the Chinese Communist Party . Foreign games published in China often require modification by developers and publishers to meet these requirements. [75] Development See also: Video game industry practices Developers use various tools to create video games. Here an editor is fine-tuning the virtual camera system . Video game development and authorship, much like any other form of entertainment, is frequently a cross-disciplinary field. Video game developers , as employees within this industry are commonly referred, primarily include programmers and graphic designers . Over the years this has expanded to include almost every type of skill that one might see prevalent in the creation of any movie or television program, including sound designers , musicians, and other technicians; as well as skills that are specific to video games, such as the game designer . All of these are managed by producers . In the early days of the industry, it was more common for a single person to manage all of the roles needed to create a video game. As platforms have become more complex and powerful in the type of material they can present, larger teams have been needed to generate all of the art, programming, cinematography, and more. This is not to say that the age of the "one-man shop" is gone, as this is still sometimes found in the casual gaming and handheld markets, [76] where smaller games are prevalent due to technical limitations such as limited RAM or lack of dedicated 3D graphics rendering capabilities on the target platform (e.g., some PDAs ). [77] Video games are programmed like any other piece of computer software. Prior to the mid-1970s, arcade and home consoles were programmed by assembling discrete electro-mechanical components on circuit boards, which limited games to relatively simple logic. By 1975, low-cost microprocessors were available at volume to be used for video game hardware, which allowed game developers to program more detailed games, widening the scope of what was possible. [78] [79] Ongoing improvements in computer hardware technology has expanded what has become possible to create in video games, coupled with convergence of common hardware between console, computer, and arcade platforms to simplify the development process. [80] Today, game developers have a number of commercial and open source tools available for use to make games, often which are across multiple platforms to support portability, or may still opt to create their own for more specialized features and direct control of the game. Today, many games are built around a game engine that handles the bulk of the game's logic, gameplay, and rendering. These engines can be augmented with specialized engines for specific features, such as a physics engine that simulates the physics of objects in real-time. A variety of middleware exists to help developers to access other features, such as for playback of videos within games, network-oriented code for games that communicate via online services, matchmaking for online games, and similar features. These features can be used from a developers' programming language of choice, or they may opt to also use game development kits that minimize the amount of direct programming they have to do but can also limit the amount of customization they can add into a game. Like all software, video games usually undergo quality testing before release to assure there are no bugs or glitches in the product, though frequently developers will release patches and updates . With the growth of the size of development teams in the industry, the problem of cost has increased. Development studios need the best talent, while publishers reduce costs to maintain profitability on their investment. Typically, a video game console development team ranges from 5 to 50 people, and some exceed 100. In May 2009, Assassin's Creed II was reported to have a development staff of 450. [81] The growth of team size combined with greater pressure to get completed projects into the market to begin recouping production costs has led to a greater occurrence of missed deadlines, rushed games and the release of unfinished products. [82] While amateur and hobbyist game programming had existed since the late 1970s with the introduction of home computers, a newer trend since the mid-2000s is indie game development . Indie games are made by small teams outside any direct publisher control, their games being smaller in scope than those from the larger " AAA " game studios, and are often experiment in gameplay and art style. Indie game development are aided by larger availability of digital distribution, including the newer mobile gaming marker, and readily-available and low-cost development tools for these platforms. [83] Game theory and studies This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2023) (
Inner view of a MacBook (Retina) laptop A SODIMM memory module The basic components of laptops function identically to their desktop counterparts. Traditionally they were miniaturized and adapted to mobile use, The design restrictions on power, size, and cooling of laptops limit the maximum performance of laptop parts compared to that of desktop components, although that difference has increasingly narrowed. [37] In general, laptop components are not intended to be replaceable or upgradable by the end-user, except for components that can be detached; in the past, batteries and optical drives were commonly exchangeable. Some laptops feature socketed processors with sockets such as the Socket G2 , but many laptops use processors that are soldered to the motherboard. Many laptops come with RAM and storage that is soldered to the motherboard and cannot be easily replaced. This restriction is one of the major differences between laptops and desktop computers, because the large " tower " cases used in desktop computers are designed so that new motherboards , hard disks , sound cards , RAM , and other components can be added. Memory and storage can often be upgraded with some disassembly, but with the most compact laptops, there may be no upgradeable components at all. [38] The following sections summarizes the differences and distinguishing features of laptop components in comparison to desktop personal computer parts. [39] Display The typical laptop has a screen that, when unfolded, is upright to the user. Screen technology Laptop screens most commonly employ liquid-crystal display (LCD) technology, although use of OLED panels has risen substantially since 2020.[ citation needed ] The display interfaces with the motherboard using the Low-voltage differential signaling (LVDS) or embedded DisplayPort protocol. Surface finish Externally, it can be a glossy or a matte (anti-glare) screen. Sizes In the past, there was a broader range of marketing terms (both formal and informal) to distinguish between different sizes of laptops. These included Netbooks , subnotebooks , Ultra-mobile PC , and Desktop replacement computers ; these are sometimes still used informally, although they are essentially dead in terms of manufacturer marketing. As of 2021, [update] mainstream consumer laptops tend to come with 11", 13" or 15"-16" screens; 14" models are more popular among business machines. Larger and smaller models are available, but less common – there is no clear dividing line in minimum or maximum size. Machines small enough to be handheld (screens in the 6–8" range) can be marketed either as very small laptops or "handheld PCs", while the distinction between the largest laptops and "All-in-One" desktops is whether they fold for travel. Resolution Having a higher resolution display allows more items to fit onscreen at a time, improving the user's ability to multitask, although at the higher resolutions on smaller screens, the resolution may only serve to display sharper graphics and text rather than increasing the usable area. Since the introduction of the MacBook Pro with Retina display in 2012, there has been an increase in the availability of "HiDPI" (or high Pixel density ) displays; as of 2022, [update] this is generally considered to be anything higher than 1920 pixels wide. This has increasingly converged around 4K (3840-pixel-wide) resolutions. External displays can be connected to most laptops, with most models supporting at least one. [40] The use of technology such as USB4 (section Alternate Mode partner specifications ). DisplayPort Alt Mode has been utilized to charge a laptop and provide display output over one USB-C Cable. [41] Refresh rates Most laptop displays have a maximum refresh rate of 60 Hz. The Dell M17x and Samsung 700G7A, both released in 2011, were among the first laptops to feature a 120 Hz refresh rate, [42] [43] and more such laptops have appeared in the years since. Central processing unit (CPU) A laptop's CPU has advanced power-saving features and produces less heat than one intended purely for desktop use. Mainstream laptop CPUs made after 2018 have at least two processor cores, often four cores, and sometimes more, with 6 and 8 cores becoming more common. For the low price and mainstream performance, there is no longer a significant performance difference between laptop and desktop CPUs, but at the high end, the fastest desktop CPUs still substantially outperform the fastest laptop processors, at the expense of massively higher power consumption and heat generation; the fastest laptop processors top out at 56 watts of heat, while the fastest desktop processors top out at 150 watts (and often need water cooling). There has been a wide range of CPUs designed for laptops available from both Intel , AMD , and other manufacturers. On non- x86 architectures, Motorola and IBM produced the chips for the former PowerPC -based Apple laptops ( iBook and PowerBook ). Between around 2000 to 2014, most full-size laptops had socketed, replaceable CPUs; on thinner models, the CPU was soldered on the motherboard and was not replaceable or upgradable without replacing the motherboard. Since 2015, Intel has not offered new laptop CPU models with pins to be interchangeable, preferring ball grid array chip packages which have to be soldered; [44] and as of 2021, only a few rare models using desktop parts. In the past, some laptops have used a desktop processor instead of the laptop version and have had high-performance gains at the cost of greater weight, heat, and limited battery life; this is not unknown as of 2022, but since around 2010, the practice has been restricted to small-volume gaming models. Laptop CPUs are rarely able to be overclocked ; most use locked processors. Even on gaming models where unlocked processors are available, the cooling system in most laptops is often very close to its limits and there is rarely headroom for an overclocking–related operating temperature increase. Graphics processing unit (GPU) On most laptops, the GPU is integrated into the CPU to conserve power and space. This was introduced by Intel with the Core i-series of mobile processors in 2010, followed by similar AMD APU processors in January 2011. Before that, lower-end machines tended to use graphics processors integrated into the system chipset , while higher-end machines had a separate graphics processor. In the past, laptops lacking a separate graphics processor were limited in their utility for gaming and professional applications involving 3D graphics, but the capabilities of CPU-integrated graphics have converged with the low-end of dedicated graphics processors since the mid-2010s. For laptops possessing limited onboard graphics capability but sufficient I/O throughput, an external GPU (eGPU) can provide additional graphics power at the cost of physical space and portability. Higher-end laptops intended for gaming or professional 3D work still come with dedicated (and in some cases even dual) graphics processors on the motherboard or as an internal expansion card . Since 2011, these almost always involve switchable graphics so that when there is no demand for the higher performance dedicated graphics processor, the more power-efficient integrated graphics processor will be used. Nvidia Optimus and AMD Hybrid Graphics are examples of this sort of system of switchable graphics. Traditionally, the system RAM on laptops (as well as on desktop computers) was physically separate from the graphics memory used by the GPU. Apple's M series SoCs feature a unified pool of memory for both the system and the GPU; this approach can produce substantial efficiency gains for some applications but comes at the cost of eGPU support. Memory Since around the year 2000, most laptops have used SO-DIMM slots in which RAM is mounted, [39] although, as of 2021, an increasing number of models use memory soldered to the motherboard, either alongside SO-DIMM slots or without any slots and soldering all memory to the motherboard. Before 2000, most laptops used proprietary memory modules if their memory was upgradable. In the early 2010s, high end laptops such as the 2011 Samsung 700G7A have passed the 10 GB RAM barrier, featuring 16 GB of RAM. [45] When upgradeable, memory slots are sometimes accessible from the bottom of the laptop for ease of upgrading; in other cases, accessing them requires significant disassembly. Most laptops have two memory slots, although some will have only one, either for cost savings or because some amount of memory is soldered. Some high-end models have four slots; these are usually mobile engineering workstations, although a few high-end models intended for gaming do as well. As of 2021, [update] 8 GB RAM is most common, with lower-end models occasionally having 4 GB. Higher-end laptops may come with 16 GB of RAM or more. Internal storage The earliest laptops most often used floppy disk for storage, although a few used either RAM disk or tape, by the late 1980s hard disk drives had become the standard form of storage. Between 1990 and 2009, almost all laptops typically had a hard disk drive (HDD) for storage; since then, solid-state drives (SSD) have gradually come to supplant hard drives in all but some inexpensive consumer models. Solid-state drives are faster and more power-efficient, as well as eliminating the hazard of drive and data corruption caused by a laptop's physical impacts, as they use no mechanical parts such as a rotational platter. [46] In many cases, they are more compact as well. Initially, in the late 2000s, SSDs were substantially more expensive than HDDs, but as of 2021 [update] prices on smaller capacity (under 1 terabyte ) drives have converged; larger capacity drives remain more expensive than comparable-sized HDDs. Since around 1990, where a hard drive is present it will typically be a 2.5-inch drive; some very compact laptops support even smaller 1.8-inch HDDs, and a very small number used 1" Microdrives . Some SSDs are built to match the size/shape of a laptop hard drive, but increasingly they have been replaced with smaller mSATA or M.2 cards. SSDs using the newer and much faster NVM Express standard for connecting are only available as cards. As of 2022, [update] many laptops no longer contain space for a 2.5" drive, accepting only M.2 cards; a few of the smallest have storage soldered to the motherboard. For those that can, they can typically contain a single 2.5-inch drive, but a small number of laptops with a screen wider than 15 inches can house two drives. A variety of external HDDs or NAS data storage servers with support of RAID technology can be attached to virtually any laptop over such interfaces as USB , FireWire , eSATA , or Thunderbolt , or over a wired or wireless network to further increase space for the storage of data. Many laptops also incorporate a SD or microSD card slot. This enables users to download digital pictures from an SD card onto a laptop, thus enabling them to delete the SD card's contents to free up space for taking new pictures. Removable media drive Optical disc drives capable of playing CD-ROMs , compact discs (CD), DVDs , and in some cases, Blu-ray discs (BD), were nearly universal on full-sized models between the mid-1990s and the early 2010s. As of 2021, [update] drives are uncommon in compact or premium laptops; they remain available in some bulkier models, but the trend towards thinner and lighter machines is gradually eliminating these drives and players – when needed they can be connected via USB instead. Inputs Closeup of a touchpad on an Acer laptop, where buttons and the touch-sensitive surface are shared Closeup of a TrackPoint cursor and UltraNav buttons on a ThinkPad laptop Interfaces on a ThinkPad laptop (2011): Ethernet network port (center), VGA (left), DisplayPort (top right) and USB 2.0 (bottom right). Due to the trend towards very flat laptops and the widespread use of WLAN , the relatively high Ethernet socket is no longer mandatory in today's devices, as is the technically outdated VGA. An alphanumeric keyboard is used to enter text, data, and other commands (e.g., function keys ). A touchpad (also called a trackpad), a pointing stick , or both, are used to control the position of the cursor on the screen, and an integrated keyboard [47] is used for typing. Some touchpads have buttons separate from the touch surface, while others share the surface. A quick double-tap is typically registered as a click, and operating systems may recognize multi-finger touch gestures. An external keyboard and mouse may be connected using a USB port or wirelessly, via Bluetooth or similar technology. Some laptops have multitouch touchscreen displays, either available as an option or standard. Most laptops have webcams and microphones , which can be used to communicate with other people with both moving images and sound, via web conferencing or video-calling software. Laptops typically have USB ports and a combined headphone/microphone jack, for use with headphones, a combined headset, or an external mic. Many laptops have a card reader for reading digital camera SD cards. Input/output (I/O) ports On a typical laptop there are several USB ports ; if they use only the older USB connectors instead of USB-C , they will typically have an external monitor port ( VGA , DVI , HDMI or Mini DisplayPort or occasionally more than one), an audio in/out port (often in form of a single socket) is common. It is possible to connect up to three external displays to a 2014-era laptop via a single Mini DisplayPort, using multi-stream transport technology. [40] Apple , in a 2015 version of its MacBook , transitioned from a number of different I/O ports to a single USB-C port. [48] This port can be used both for charging and connecting a variety of devices through the use of aftermarket adapters. Apple has since transitioned back to using a number of different ports. Google, with its updated version of Chromebook Pixel , shows a similar transition trend towards USB-C, although keeping older USB Type-A ports for a better compatibility with older devices. [49] Although being common until the end of the 2000s decade, Ethernet network port are rarely found on modern laptops, due to widespread use of wireless networking , such as Wi-Fi . Legacy ports such as a PS/2 keyboard/mouse port, serial port , parallel port , or FireWire are provided on some models, but they are increasingly rare. On Apple 's systems, and on a handful of other laptops, there are also Thunderbolt ports, but Thunderbolt 3 uses USB-C. Laptops typically have a headphone jack, so that the user can connect headphones or amplified speaker systems for listening to music or other audio. Expansion cards In the past, a PC Card (formerly PCMCIA ) or ExpressCard slot for expansion was often present on laptops to allow adding and removing functionality, even when the laptop is powered on; these are becoming increasingly rare since the introduction of USB 3.0 . Some internal subsystems such as Ethernet, Wi-Fi, or a wireless cellular modem can be implemented as replaceable internal expansion cards, usually accessible under an access cover on the bottom of the laptop. The standard for such cards is PCI Express , which comes in both mini and even smaller M.2 sizes. In newer laptops, it is not uncommon to also see Micro SATA (mSATA) functionality on PCI Express Mini or M.2 card slots allowing the use of those slots for SATA-based solid-state drives. [50] Mobile PCI Express Module (MXM) is a type of expansion card that is used for graphics cards. [51] Battery and power supply Main article: Smart battery Almost all laptops use smart batteries. Since the late 1990s, laptops have typically used lithium ion or lithium polymer batteries , These replaced the older nickel metal-hydride typically used in the 1990s, and nickel–cadmium batteries used in most of the earliest laptops. A few of the oldest laptops used non-rechargeable batteries , or lead–acid batteries. Battery life is highly variable by model and workload and can range from one hour to nearly a day. A battery's performance gradually decreases over time ; a noticeable reduction in capacity is typically evident after two to three years of regular use, depending on the charging and discharging pattern and the design of the battery. Innovations in laptops and batteries have seen situations in which the battery can provide up to 24 hours of continued operation, assuming average power consumption levels. An example is the HP EliteBook 6930p when used with its ultra-capacity battery. [52] Laptops with removable batteries may support larger replacement batteries with extended capacity. A laptop's battery is charged using an external power supply , which is plugged into a wall outlet. The power supply outputs a DC voltage typically in the range of 7.2—24 volts. The power supply is usually external and connected to the laptop through a DC connector cable. In most cases, it can charge the battery and power the laptop simultaneously. When the battery is fully charged, the laptop continues to run on power supplied by the external power supply, avoiding battery use. If the used power supply is not strong enough to power computing components and charge the battery simultaneously, the battery may charge in a shorter period of time if the laptop is turned off or sleeping. The charger typically adds about 400 grams (0.88 lb) to the overall transporting weight of a laptop, although some models are substantially heavier or lighter. Most 2016-era laptops use a smart battery , a rechargeable battery pack with a built-in battery management system (BMS). The smart battery can internally measure voltage and current, and deduce charge level and State of Health (SoH) parameters, indicating the state of the cells.[ citation needed ] Power connectors Laptop power supply with cylindrical coaxial DC power connector Historically, DC connectors , typically cylindrical/barrel-shaped coaxial power connectors have been used in laptops. Some vendors such as Lenovo made intermittent use of a rectangular connector. Some connector heads feature a center pin to allow the end device to determine the power supply type by measuring the resistance between it and the connector's negative pole (outer surface). Vendors may block charging if a power supply is not recognized as original part, which could deny the legitimate use of universal third-party chargers. [53] With the advent of USB-C , portable electronics made increasing use of it for both power delivery and data transfer. Its support for 20 V (common laptop power supply voltage) and 5 A typically suffices for low to mid-end laptops, but some with higher power demands such as gaming laptops depend on dedicated DC connectors to handle currents beyond 5 A without risking overheating, some even above 10 A. Additionally, dedicated DC connectors are more durable and less prone to wear and tear from frequent reconnection, as their design is less delicate. [54] Cooling Waste heat from the operation is difficult to remove in the compact internal space of a laptop. The earliest laptops used passive cooling; this gave way to heat sinks placed directly on the components to be cooled, but when these hot components are deep inside the device, a large space-wasting air duct is needed to exhaust the heat. Modern laptops instead rely on heat pipes to rapidly move waste heat towards the edges of the device, to allow for a much smaller and compact fan and heat sink cooling system. Waste heat is usually exhausted away from the device operator towards the rear or sides of the device. Multiple air intake paths are used since some intakes can be blocked, such as when the device is placed on a soft conforming surface like a chair cushion. Secondary device temperature monitoring may reduce performance or trigger an emergency shutdown if it is unable to dissipate heat, such as if the laptop were to be left running and placed inside a carrying case. Aftermarket cooling pads with external fans can be used with laptops to reduce operating temperatures. Docking station Docking station and laptop A docking station (sometimes referred to simply as a dock) is a laptop accessory that contains multiple ports and in some cases expansion slots or bays for fixed or removable drives. A laptop connects and disconnects to a docking station, typically through a single large proprietary connector. A docking station is an especially popular laptop accessory in a corporate computing environment, due to a possibility of a docking station transforming a laptop into a full-featured desktop replacement, yet allowing for its easy release. This ability can be advantageous to " road warrior " employees who have to travel frequently for work, and yet who also come into the office. If more ports are needed, or their position on a laptop is inconvenient, one can use a cheaper passive device known as a port replicator . These devices mate to the connectors on the laptop, such as through USB or FireWire . Charging trolleys Laptop charging trolleys , also known as laptop trolleys or laptop carts, are mobile storage containers to charge multiple laptops , netbooks , and tablet computers at the same time. The trolleys are used in schools that have replaced their traditional static computer labs [55] suites of desktop equipped with "tower" computers, but do not have enough plug sockets in an individual classroom to charge all of the devices. The trolleys can be wheeled between rooms and classrooms so that all students and teachers in a particular building can access fully charged IT equipment. [56] Laptop charging trolleys are also used to deter and protect against opportunistic and organized theft. Schools, especially those with open plan designs, are often prime targets for thieves who steal high-value items. Laptops, netbooks, and tablets are among the highest–value portable items in a school. Moreover, laptops can easily be concealed under clothing and stolen from buildings. Many types of laptop–charging trolleys are designed and constructed to protect against theft. They are generally made out of steel, and the laptops remain locked up while not in use. Although the trolleys can be moved between areas from one classroom to another, they can often be mounted or locked to the floor, support pillars, or walls to prevent thieves from stealing the laptops, especially overnight. [55] Solar panels Main article: Solar notebook In some laptops, solar panels are able to generate enough solar power for the laptop to operate. [57] The One Laptop Per Child Initiative released the OLPC XO-1 laptop which was tested and successfully operated by use of solar panels. [58] Presently, they are designing an OLPC XO-3 laptop with these features. The OLPC XO-3 can operate with 2 watts of electricity because its renewable energy resources generate a total of 4 watts. [59] [60] Samsung has also designed the NC215S solar–powered notebook that will be sold commercially in the U.S. market. [61] Accessories A common accessory for laptops is a laptop sleeve, laptop skin, or laptop case, which provides a degree of protection from scratches. Sleeves, which are distinguished by being relatively thin and flexible, are most commonly made of neoprene , with sturdier ones made of low-resilience polyurethane . Some laptop sleeves are wrapped in ballistic nylon to provide some measure of waterproofing . Bulkier and sturdier cases can be made of metal with polyurethane padding inside and may have locks for added security. Metal, padded cases also offer protection against impacts and drops. Another common accessory is a laptop cooler , a device that helps lower the internal temperature of the laptop either actively or passively. A common active method involves using electric fans to draw heat away from the laptop, while a passive method might involve propping the laptop up on some type of pad so it can receive more airflow. Some stores sell laptop pads that enable a reclining person on a bed to use a laptop. Modularity Opened bottom covers allow replacement of RAM and storage modules (Lenovo G555). Some of the components of earlier models of laptops can easily be replaced without opening completely its bottom part, such as keyboard, battery, hard disk, memory modules, CPU cooling fan, etc. Some of the components of recent models of laptops reside inside. Replacing most of its components, such as keyboard, battery, hard disk, memory modules, CPU cooling fan, etc., requires removal of its either top or bottom part, removal of the motherboard, and returning them. In some types, solder and glue are used to mount components such as RAM, storage, and batteries, making repairs additionally difficult. [62] [63] Obsolete features A modem PCMCIA card on a 1990s ThinkPad. The card would normally fully insert into the socket. Features that certain early models of laptops used to have that are not available in most current laptops include: Reset ("cold restart") button in a hole (needed a thin metal tool to press) Instant power off button in a hole (needed a thin metal tool to press) Integrated charger or power adapter inside the laptop Dedicated Media buttons (Internet, Volume, Play, Pause, Next, Previous)
Regional diversity[ edit ] Regional cuisines can vary based on availability and usage of specific ingredients, local cooking traditions and practices, as well as overall cultural differences. [14] Such factors can be more-or-less uniform across wide swaths of territory, or vary intensely within individual regions. For example, in Central and North South America, corn ( maize ), both fresh and dried, is a staple food, and is used in many different ways. In northern Europe, wheat , rye , and fats of animal origin predominate, while in southern Europe olive oil is ubiquitous and rice is more prevalent. In Italy, the cuisine of the north, featuring butter and rice, stands in contrast to that of the south, with its wheat pasta and olive oil. In some parts of China, rice is the staple, while in others this role is filled by noodles and bread . Throughout the Middle East and Mediterranean, common ingredients include lamb , olive oil, lemons , peppers , and rice. The vegetarianism practiced in much of India has made pulses (crops harvested solely for the dry seed) such as chickpeas and lentils as important as wheat or rice. From India to Indonesia, the extensive use of spices is characteristic; coconuts and seafood are also used throughout the region both as foodstuffs and as seasonings . Main article: List of African cuisines African cuisines use a combination of locally available fruits , cereals and vegetables , as well as milk and meat products. In some parts of the continent, the traditional diet features a preponderance of milk, curd and whey products. In much of tropical Africa, however, cow's milk is rare and cannot be produced locally (owing to various diseases that affect livestock). The continent's diverse demographic makeup is reflected in the many different eating and drinking habits, dishes, and preparation techniques of its manifold populations. [15] Typical Ethiopian and Eritrean cuisine : Injera (thin pancake-like bread) and several kinds of wat (stew) A Ramadan dinner in Tanzania Yassa is a popular dish throughout West Africa prepared with chicken or fish . Chicken yassa is pictured. Spices at central market in Agadir , Morocco Main article: List of Asian cuisines Due to Asia's vast size and extremely diverse geography and demographics, Asian cuisines are many and varied, and include East Asian cuisine , South Asian cuisine , Southeast Asian cuisine , Central Asian cuisine and West Asian cuisine . Ingredients common to East Asia and Southeast Asia (due to overseas Chinese influence) include rice, ginger, garlic, sesame seeds, chilies, dried onions, soy, and tofu, with stir frying , steaming, and deep frying being common cooking methods. While rice is common to most regional cuisines in Asia, different varieties are popular in the different regions: Basmati rice is popular in South Asia, Jasmine rice in Southeast Asia, and long-grain rice in China and short-grain rice in Japan and Korea. [16] Curry is also a common ingredient found in South Asia, Southeast Asia, and East Asia (notably Japanese curry ); however, they are not popular in West Asian and Central Asian cuisines. Those curry dishes with origins in South Asia usually have a yogurt base, with origins in Southeast Asia a coconut milk base, and in East Asia a stewed meat and vegetable base. [17] South Asian cuisine and Southeast Asian cuisine are often characterized by their extensive use of spices and herbs native to the tropical regions of Asia. Due to Guangdong 's location on the southern coast of China, fresh live seafood is a specialty in Cantonese cuisine . Such markets selling seafood are found across East Asia . Traditional North Indian vegetarian thali with various curries from India . Various curry dishes are found across South Asia . A market stall at Thanin market in Chiang Mai , Thailand , selling readily-made food. Market stalls selling food are found across Southeast Asia . A Tajik feast. A large feast is commonly associated with cultures of Central Asia . Typical Assyrian cuisine; an example of a type of meal found in West Asia . Main article: List of European cuisines European cuisine (alternatively, "Western cuisine") include the cuisines of Europe and other Western countries . European cuisine includes non- indigenous cuisines of North America , Australasia , Oceania , and Latin America as well. The term is used by East Asians to contrast with East Asian styles of cooking. [18] When used in English, the term may refer more specifically to cuisine in ( Continental ) Europe; in this context, a synonym is Continental cuisine.
See also: Gamesmanship , Winning isn't everything; it's the only thing , and Moral development Sportsmanship is an attitude that strives for fair play, courtesy toward teammates and opponents, ethical behaviour and integrity, and grace in victory or defeat. [21] [22] [23] Sportsmanship expresses an aspiration or ethos that the activity will be enjoyed for its own sake. The well-known sentiment by sports journalist Grantland Rice , that it is "not that you won or lost but how you played the game", and the modern Olympic creed expressed by its founder Pierre de Coubertin : "The most important thing... is not winning but taking part" are typical expressions of this sentiment. Cheating See also: Match fixing and cheating Key principles of sport include that the result should not be predetermined, and that both sides should have equal opportunity to win. Rules are in place to ensure fair play, but participants can break these rules in order to gain advantage. Participants may cheat in order to unfairly increase their chance of winning, or in order to achieve other advantages such as financial gains. The widespread existence of gambling on the results of sports events creates a motivation for match fixing , where a participant or participants deliberately work to ensure a given outcome rather than simply playing to win. Doping and drugs Main article: Use of performance-enhancing drugs in sport The competitive nature of sport encourages some participants to attempt to enhance their performance through the use of medicines, or through other means such as increasing the volume of blood in their bodies through artificial means . All sports recognised by the IOC or SportAccord are required to implement a testing programme, looking for a list of banned drugs, with suspensions or bans being placed on participants who test positive for banned substances. Violence Violence in sports involves crossing the line between fair competition and intentional aggressive violence. Athletes, coaches, fans, and parents sometimes unleash violent behaviour on people or property, in misguided shows of loyalty, dominance, anger, or celebration. Rioting or hooliganism by fans in particular is a problem at some national and international sporting contests.[ citation needed ] Participation See also: Women's sports and Women's professional sports International level female athletes at ISTAF Berlin , 2006 Female participation in sports continues to rise alongside the opportunity for involvement and the value of sports for child development and physical fitness . Despite increases in female participation during the last three decades, a gap persists in the enrolment figures between male and female players in sports-related teams. Female players account for 39% of the total participation in US interscholastic athletics. Certain sports are mixed-gender , allowing (or even requiring) men and women to play on the same team. One example of this is Baseball5 , which is the first mixed-gender sport to have been admitted into an Olympic event. [24] Youth participation See also: College sports Youth sport presents children with opportunities for fun, socialisation, forming peer relationships, physical fitness , and athletic scholarships . Activists for education and the war on drugs encourage youth sport as a means to increase educational participation and to fight the illegal drug trade . According to the Center for Injury Research and Policy at Nationwide Children's Hospital , the biggest risk for youth sport is death or serious injury including concussion . These risks come from running, basketball, association football, volleyball, gridiron, gymnastics, and ice hockey. [25] Youth sport in the US is a $15 billion industry including equipment up to private coaching. [26] Disabled participation See also: Parasports A runner gives a friendly tap on the shoulder to a wheelchair racer during the Marathon International de Paris (Paris Marathon) in 2014. Disabled sports also adaptive sports or parasports, are sports played by people with a disability , including physical and intellectual disabilities . As many of these are based on existing sports modified to meet the needs of people with a disability, they are sometimes referred to as adapted sports. However, not all disabled sports are adapted; several sports that have been specifically created for people with a disability have no equivalent in able-bodied sports. Spectator involvement Main article: Spectator sport Spectators at the 1906 unofficial Olympic Games The competition element of sport, along with the aesthetic appeal of some sports, result in the popularity of people attending to watch sport being played. This has led to the specific phenomenon of spectator sport. Both amateur and professional sports attract spectators, both in person at the sport venue, and through broadcast media including radio , television and internet broadcast. Both attendance in person and viewing remotely can incur a sometimes substantial charge, such as an entrance ticket, or pay-per-view television broadcast. Sports league and tournament are two common arrangements to organise sport teams or individual athletes into competing against each other continuously or periodically. It is common for popular sports to attract large broadcast audiences, leading to rival broadcasters bidding large amounts of money for the rights to show certain events. The football World Cup attracts a global television audience of hundreds of millions; the 2006 final alone attracted an estimated worldwide audience of well over 700 million and the 2011 Cricket World Cup Final attracted an estimated audience of 135 million in India alone. [27] In the United States, the championship game of the NFL , the Super Bowl , has become one of the most watched television broadcasts of the year. [28] [29] Super Bowl Sunday is a de facto national holiday in America; [30] [31] the viewership being so great that in 2015, advertising space was reported as being sold at $ 4.5m for a 30-second slot. [28] Amateur and professional See also: Professional sport and Amateur sport Women's volleyball team of a U.S. university Sport can be undertaken on an amateur, professional or semi-professional basis, depending on whether participants are incentivised for participation (usually through payment of a wage or salary ). Amateur participation in sport at lower levels is often called "grassroots sport". [2] [32] The popularity of spectator sport as a recreation for non-participants has led to sport becoming a major business in its own right, and this has incentivised a high paying professional sport culture, where high performing participants are rewarded with pay far in excess of average wages, which can run into millions of dollars. [33] Some sports, or individual competitions within a sport, retain a policy of allowing only amateur sport . The Olympic Games started with a principle of amateur competition with those who practised a sport professionally considered to have an unfair advantage over those who practised it merely as a hobby. [34] From 1971, Olympic athletes were allowed to receive compensation and sponsorship, [35] and from 1986, the IOC decided to make all professional athletes eligible for the Olympics, [35] [36] with the exceptions of boxing , [37] [38] and wrestling. [39] [40] Technology These lights at the Melbourne Cricket Ground indicate the decision the third umpire makes following a review. Technology plays an important part in modern sport. It is a necessary part of some sports (such as motorsport), and it is used in others to improve performance. Some sports also use it to allow off-field decision making. Sports science is a widespread academic discipline, and can be applied to areas including athlete performance, such as the use of video analysis to fine-tune technique, or to equipment, such as improved running shoes or competitive swimwear . Sports engineering emerged as a discipline in 1998 with an increasing focus not just on materials design but also the use of technology in sport, from analytics and big data to wearable technology . [41] In order to control the impact of technology on fair play, governing bodies frequently have specific rules that are set to control the impact of technical advantage between participants. For example, in 2010, full-body, non-textile swimsuits were banned by FINA , as they were enhancing swimmers' performances. [42] [43] The increase in technology has also allowed many decisions in sports matches to be taken, or reviewed, off-field, with another official using instant replays to make decisions. In some sports, players can now challenge decisions made by officials. In Association football , goal-line technology makes decisions on whether a ball has crossed the goal line or not. [44] The technology is not compulsory, [45] but was used in the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil, [46] and the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup in Canada, [47] as well as in the Premier League from 2013–14 , [48] and the Bundesliga from 2015–16 . [49] In the NFL , a referee can ask for a review from the replay booth, or a head coach can issue a challenge to review the play using replays. The final decision rests with the referee. [50] A video referee (commonly known as a Television Match Official or TMO) can also use replays to help decision-making in rugby (both league and union ). [51] [52] In international cricket, an umpire can ask the Third umpire for a decision, and the third umpire makes the final decision. [53] [54] Since 2008, a decision review system for players to review decisions has been introduced and used in ICC -run tournaments, and optionally in other matches. [53] [55] Depending on the host broadcaster, a number of different technologies are used during an umpire or player review, including instant replays, Hawk-Eye , Hot Spot and Real Time Snickometer . [56] [57] Hawk-Eye is also used in tennis to challenge umpiring decisions. [58] [59] Sports and education Research suggests that sports have the capacity to connect youth to positive adult role models and provide positive development opportunities, as well as promote the learning and application of life skills . [60] [61] In recent years the use of sport to reduce crime , as well as to prevent violent extremism and radicalization , has become more widespread, especially as a tool to improve self-esteem , enhance social bonds and provide participants with a feeling of purpose. [61] There is no high-quality evidence that shows the effectiveness of interventions to increase sports participation of the community in sports such as mass media campaigns, educational sessions, and policy changes. [62] There is also no high-quality studies that investigate the effect of such interventions in promoting healthy behaviour change in the community. [63] sports is one of the important part of life Politics Benito Mussolini used the 1934 FIFA World Cup , which was held in Italy, to showcase Fascist Italy . [64] [65] Adolf Hitler also used the 1936 Summer Olympics held in Berlin , and the 1936 Winter Olympics held in Garmisch-Partenkirchen , to promote the Nazi ideology of the superiority of the Aryan race , and inferiority of the Jews and other " undesirables ". [65] [66] Germany used the Olympics to give off a peaceful image while secretly preparing for war. [67] When apartheid was the official policy in South Africa, many sports people, particularly in rugby union , adopted the conscientious approach that they should not appear in competitive sports there. Some feel this was an effective contribution to the eventual demolition of the policy of apartheid, others feel that it may have prolonged and reinforced its worst effects. [68] In the history of Ireland, Gaelic sports were connected with cultural nationalism . Until the mid-20th century a person could have been banned from playing Gaelic football , hurling , or other sports administered by the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) if she/he played or supported Association football , or other games seen to be of British origin. Until recently the GAA continued to ban the playing of football and rugby union at Gaelic venues. This ban, also known as Rule 42, [69] is still enforced, but was modified to allow football and rugby to be played in Croke Park while Lansdowne Road was redeveloped into Aviva Stadium . Until recently, under Rule 21, the GAA also banned members of the British security forces and members of the RUC from playing Gaelic games, but the advent of the Good Friday Agreement in 1998 led to the eventual removal of the ban. [70] Nationalism is often evident in the pursuit of sport, or in its reporting: people compete in national teams, or commentators and audiences can adopt a partisan view. On occasion, such tensions can lead to violent confrontation among players or spectators within and beyond the sporting venue, as in the Football War . These trends are seen by many as contrary to the fundamental ethos of sport being carried on for its own sake and for the enjoyment of its participants. Sport and politics collided in the 1972 Olympics in Munich. Masked men entered the hotel of the Israeli Olympic team and killed many of their men. This was known as the Munich massacre . A study of US elections has shown that the result of sports events can affect the results. A study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences showed that when the home team wins the game before the election, the incumbent candidates can increase their share of the vote by 1.5 per cent. A loss had the opposite effect, and the effect is greater for higher-profile teams or unexpected wins and losses. [71] Also, when Washington Redskins win their final game before an election, then the incumbent president is more likely to win, and if the Redskins lose, then the opposition candidate is more likely to win; this has become known as the Redskins Rule . [72] [73] As a means of controlling and subduing populations Étienne de La Boétie , in his essay Discourse on Voluntary Servitude describes athletic spectacles as means for tyrants to control their subjects by distracting them. Do not imagine that there is any bird more easily caught by decoy, nor any fish sooner fixed on the hook by wormy bait, than are all these poor fools neatly tricked into servitude by the slightest feather passed, so to speak, before their mouths. Truly it is a marvellous thing that they let themselves be caught so quickly at the slightest tickling of their fancy. Plays, farces, spectacles, gladiators, strange beasts, medals, pictures, and other such opiates, these were for ancient peoples the bait toward slavery, the price of their liberty, the instruments of tyranny. By these practices and enticements the ancient dictators so successfully lulled their subjects under the yoke, that the stupefied peoples, fascinated by the pastimes and vain pleasures flashed before their eyes, learned subservience as naïvely, but not so creditably, as little children learn to read by looking at bright picture books. [74] During the British rule of Bengal , British and European sports began to supplant traditional Bengali sports , resulting in a loss of native culture. [75] [76] Religious views Main article: New Testament athletic metaphors The foot race was one of the events dedicated to Zeus. Panathenaic amphora, Kleophrades painter, c. 500 BC, Louvre museum. Sport was an important form of worship in Ancient Greek religion . The ancient Olympic Games were held in honour of the head deity, Zeus , and featured various forms of religious dedication to him and other gods. [77] As many Greeks travelled to see the games, this combination of religion and sport also served as a way of uniting them. The practice of athletic competitions has been criticised by some Christian thinkers as a form of idolatry , in which "human beings extol themselves, adore themselves, sacrifice themselves and reward themselves." [78] Sports are seen by these critics as a manifestation of "collective pride" and "national self-deification" in which feats of human power are idolised at the expense of divine worship. [78] Tertullian condemns the athletic performances of his day, insisting "the entire apparatus of the shows is based upon idolatry." [79] The shows, says Tertullian, excite passions foreign to the calm temperament cultivated by the Christian: God has enjoined us to deal calmly, gently, quietly, and peacefully with the Holy Spirit, because these things are alone in keeping with the goodness of His nature, with His tenderness and sensitiveness. ... Well, how shall this be made to accord with the shows? For the show always leads to spiritual agitation, since where there is pleasure, there is keenness of feeling giving pleasure its zest; and where there is keenness of feeling, there is rivalry giving in turn its zest to that. Then, too, where you have rivalry, you have rage, bitterness, wrath and grief, with all bad things which flow from them – the whole entirely out of keeping with the religion of Christ. [80] Christian clerics in the Wesleyan-Holiness movement oppose the viewing of or participation in professional sports, believing that professional sports leagues profane the Sabbath as in the modern era, certain associations hold games on the Lord's Day . [81] They also criticise professional sports for its fostering of a commitment that competes with a Christian's primary commitment to God in opposition to 1 Corinthians 7:35 , what they perceive to be a lack of modesty in the players' and cheerleaders' uniforms (which are not in conformity with the Methodistic doctrine of outward holiness), its association with violence in opposition to Hebrews 7:26 , what they perceive to be the extensive use of profanity among many players that contravenes Colossians 3:8–10 , and the frequent presence of gambling, as well as alcohol and other drugs at sporting events, which go against a commitment to teetotalism . [81] Popularity Popularity in 2018 of major sports by size of fan base : [7] Rank
Haute couture fashion models walk the runway during New York Fashion Week in February 2014, at the Carolina Herrera show. In its most common use, the term fashion refers to the current expressions on sale through the fashion industry. The global fashion industry is a product of the modern age. [39] In the Western world, tailoring has since medieval times been controlled by guilds , but with the emergence of industrialism , the power of the guilds was undermined. Before the mid-19th century, most clothing was custom-made . It was handmade for individuals, either as home production or on order from dressmakers and tailors. By the beginning of the 20th century, with the rise of new technologies such as the sewing machine , the rise of global trade, the development of the factory system of production, and the proliferation of retail outlets such as department stores, clothing became increasingly mass-produced in standard sizes and sold at fixed prices. Although the fashion industry developed first in Europe and America, as of 2017 [update] , it is an international and highly globalized industry, with clothing often designed in one country, manufactured in another, and sold worldwide. For example, an American fashion company might source fabric in China and have the clothes manufactured in Vietnam, finished in Italy, and shipped to a warehouse in the United States for distribution to retail outlets internationally. The fashion industry has for a long time been one of the largest employers in the United States, [39] and it remains so in the 21st century. However, U.S. employment in fashion began to decline considerably as production increasingly moved overseas, especially to China. Because data regarding the fashion industry typically are reported for national economies and expressed in terms of the industry's many separate sectors, aggregate figures for the world production of textiles and clothing are difficult to obtain. However, by any measure, the clothing industry accounts for a significant share of world economic output. [40] The fashion industry consists of four levels: The production of raw materials, principally fiber , and textiles but also leather and fur . The production of fashion goods by designers, manufacturers, contractors, and others. Retail sales. Various forms of advertising and promotion. The levels of focus in the fashion industry consist of many separate but interdependent sectors. These sectors include textile design and production, fashion design and manufacturing, fashion retailing, marketing and merchandising , fashion shows , and media and marketing. Each sector is devoted to the goal of satisfying consumer demand for apparel under conditions that enable participants in the industry to operate at a profit. [39] Fashion trends See: Category:Fashion by decade A fashion trend signifies a specific look or expression that is spread across a population at a specific time and place. A trend is considered a more ephemeral look, not defined by the seasons when collections are released by the fashion industry. A trend can thus emerge from street style , across cultures, and from influencers and other celebrities . Fashion trends are influenced by several factors, including cinema, celebrities, climate, creative explorations, innovations, designs, political, economic, social, and technological. Examining these factors is called a PEST analysis . Fashion forecasters can use this information to help determine the growth or decline of a particular trend. People's minds as well as their perceptions and consciousness are constantly changing. Fads are inherently social, are constantly evolving in a contradiction between the old and the new, and are in a sense easily influenced by those around them, and therefore also begin to imitate constantly. [41] Continuing on from the maximalist and 1980s influences of the early 2020s , vibrant coloured clothing had made a comeback for women in America, France, China, Korea, and the Ukraine [42] by the spring of 2023. [43] This style, sometimes referred to as " dopamine dressing", featured long skirts and belted maxi dresses with thigh splits, lots of gold and pearl jewelry, oversized striped cardigan sweaters , multicoloured silk skirts with seashell or floral print, strappy sandals, pants with a contrasting stripe down the leg, ugg boots , [44] floral print maxi skirts , Y2K inspired platform shoes , chunky red rain boots , [45] shimmery jumpsuits , [46] knitted dresses, leather pilot jackets with faux fur collars, [47] skirts with bold contrasting vertical stripes, trouser suits with bootcut legs, jeans with glittery heart or star-shaped details, chunky white or black sandals, and zebra print tote bags . [48] [49] In 2023, the predominant colours in Britain, France and America were red, white and blue. As in the mid to late 1970s , Western shirts with pearl snaps in denim or bright madras plaid made a comeback, and sometimes featured contrasting yokes and cuffs with intricate embroidery. [53] [54] Moccasins , stonewash denim waistcoats with decorative fringes, preppy loafers, navy blue suits and sportcoats , straight leg jeans instead of the skinny jeans fashionable from the late 2000s until the early 2020s , [55] stetsons , white baseball jerseys with bold red or blue pinstripes , striped blue neckties , baggy white pants , Union Jack motifs, flared jeans , duster coats as worn in the Yellowstone TV series, [56] preppy style college sweaters , retro blue and white striped football shirts , [57] chelsea boots with cowboy boot styling, two-button blazers with red and blue boating stripes, V-neck sweater vests , royal blue baseball jackets with white sleeves, Howler Brothers gilets , [58] shirts and suits worn open to expose the chest, [59] and boxy leather reefer jackets were popular on both sides of the Atlantic. [60] [61] [62] Social influences Celebrities such as Britney Spears have popularized the concept of wearing underwear as outerwear . Fashion is inherently a social phenomenon . A person cannot have a fashion by oneself, but for something to be defined as fashion, there needs to be dissemination and followers. This dissemination can take several forms; from the top-down ("trickle-down") to bottom-up ("bubble up/trickle-up"), or transversally across cultures and through viral memes and media ("trickle-across"). Fashion relates to the social and cultural context of an environment. According to Matika, [63] "Elements of popular culture become fused when a person's trend is associated with a preference for a genre of music […] like music, news, or literature, fashion has been fused into everyday lives." Fashion is not only seen as purely aesthetic; fashion is also a medium for people to create an overall effect and express their opinions and overall art. This mirrors what performers frequently accomplish through music videos. In the music video 'Formation' by Beyoncé , according to Carlos, [64] The annual or seasonal runway show is a reflection of fashion trends and a designer's inspirations. For designers like Vivienne Westwood , runway shows are a platform for her voice on politics and current events. For her AW15 menswear show, according to Water, [65] "where models with severely bruised faces channeled eco-warriors on a mission to save the planet." Another recent example is a staged feminist protest march for Chanel's SS15 show, rioting models chanting words of empowerment using signs like "Feminist but feminine" and "Ladies first." According to Water, [65] "The show tapped into Chanel's long history of championing female independence: founder Coco Chanel was a trailblazer for liberating the female body in the post-WWI era, introducing silhouettes that countered the restrictive corsets then in favour." The annual Met Gala ceremony in Manhattan is the premier venue where fashion designers and their creations are celebrated. Social media is also a place where fashion is presented most often. Some influencers are paid huge amounts of money to promote a product or clothing item, where the business hopes many viewers will buy the product off the back of the advertisement. Instagram is the most popular platform for advertising, but Facebook, Snapchat, Twitter and other platforms are also used. [66] In New York, the LGBT fashion design community contributes very significantly to promulgating fashion trends, and drag celebrities have developed a profound influence upon New York Fashion Week . [67] Marketing Market research Fur fashion for sale in Tallinn , Estonia Consumers of different groups have varying needs and demands. Factors taken into consideration when analyzing consumers' needs include key demographics. [68] To understand consumers' needs and predict fashion trends, fashion companies have to do market research [69] There are two research methods: primary and secondary. [70] Secondary methods are taking other information that has already been collected, for example using a book or an article for research. Primary research is collecting data through surveys, interviews, observation, and/or focus groups. Primary research often focuses on large sample sizes to determine customer's motivations to shop. [71] The benefits of primary research are specific information about a fashion brand's consumer is explored. Surveys are helpful tools; questions can be open-ended or closed-ended. Negative factor surveys and interviews present is that the answers can be biased, due to wording in the survey or on face-to-face interactions. Focus groups, about 8 to 12 people, can be beneficial because several points can be addressed in depth. However, there are drawbacks to this tactic, too. With such a small sample size, it is hard to know if the greater public would react the same way as the focus group. [70] Observation can really help a company gain insight on what a consumer truly wants. There is less of a bias because consumers are just performing their daily tasks, not necessarily realizing they are being observed. For example, observing the public by taking street style photos of people, the consumer did not get dressed in the morning knowing that would have their photo taken necessarily. They just wear what they would normally wear. Through observation patterns can be seen, helping trend forecasters know what their target market needs and wants. Knowing the needs of consumers will increase fashion companies' sales and profits. Through research and studying the consumers' lives the needs of the customer can be obtained and help fashion brands know what trends the consumers are ready for. Symbolic consumption Consumption is driven not only by need, the symbolic meaning for consumers is also a factor. Consumers engaging in symbolic consumption may develop a sense of self over an extended period of time as various objects are collected as part of the process of establishing their identity and, when the symbolic meaning is shared in a social group, to communicate their identity to others. For teenagers, consumption plays a role in distinguishing the child self from the adult. Researchers have found that the fashion choices of teenagers are used for self-expression and also to recognize other teens who wear similar clothes. The symbolic association of clothing items can link individuals' personality and interests, with music as a prominent factor influencing fashion decisions. [72] Political influences Ivanka Trump (right) along with Japanese PM Shinzō Abe wearing Western-style business suits , 2017 Political figures have played a central role in the development of fashion, at least since the time of French king Louis XIV . For example, First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy was a fashion icon of the early 1960s. Wearing Chanel suits, structural Givenchy shift dresses, and soft color Cassini coats with large buttons, she inspired trends of both elegant formal dressing and classic feminine style. [73] Cultural upheavals have also had an impact on fashion trends. For example, during the 1960s, the U.S. economy was robust, the divorce rate was increasing, and the government approved the birth control pill . These factors inspired the younger generation to rebel against entrenched social norms. The civil rights movement, a struggle for social justice and equal opportunity for Blacks, and the women's liberation movement, seeking equal rights and opportunities and greater personal freedom for women, were in full bloom. In 1964, the leg-baring mini-skirt was introduced and became a white-hot trend. Fashion designers then began to experiment with the shapes of garments: loose sleeveless dresses, micro-minis, flared skirts, and trumpet sleeves. Fluorescent colors, print patterns, bell-bottom jeans, fringed vests, and skirts became de rigueur outfits of the 1960s. [74] Concern and protest over U.S. involvement in the failing Vietnam War also influenced fashion. Camouflage patterns in military clothing, developed to help military personnel be less visible to enemy forces, seeped into streetwear designs in the 1960s. Camouflage trends have disappeared and resurfaced several times since then, appearing in high fashion iterations in the 1990s. [75] Designers such as Valentino, Dior, and Dolce & Gabbana combined camouflage into their runway and ready-to-wear collections. Today, variations of camouflage, including pastel shades, in every article of clothing or accessory, continue to enjoy popularity. Technology influences Today, technology plays a sizable role in society, and technological influences are correspondingly increasing within the realm of fashion. Wearable technology has become incorporated; for example, clothing constructed with solar panels that charge devices and smart fabrics that enhance wearer comfort by changing color or texture based on environmental changes. [76] 3D printing technology has influenced designers such as Iris van Herpen and Kimberly Ovitz . As the technology evolves, 3D printers will become more accessible to designers and eventually, consumers — these could potentially reshape design and production in the fashion industry entirely. Internet technology, enabling the far reaches of online retailers and social media platforms, has created previously unimaginable ways for trends to be identified, marketed, and sold immediately. [77] Trend-setting styles are easily displayed and communicated online to attract customers. Posts on Instagram or Facebook can quickly increase awareness about new trends in fashion, which subsequently may create high demand for specific items or brands, [78] new "buy now button" technology can link these styles with direct sales. Machine vision technology has been developed to track how fashions spread through society. The industry can now see the direct correlation on how fashion shows influence street-chic outfits. Effects such as these can now be quantified and provide valuable feedback to fashion houses, designers, and consumers regarding trends. [79] Environmental impact This section is an excerpt from Environmental impact of fashion .[ edit ] Production of cotton requires a large amount of water, and also produces wastewater . The fashion industry , particularly manufacture and use of apparel and footwear , is a significant driver of greenhouse gas emissions and plastic pollution . [80] The rapid growth of fast fashion has led to around 80 billion items of clothing being consumed annually, with about 85% of clothes consumed in United States being sent to landfill . [81] Less than one percent of clothing is recycled to make new clothes. [82] The industry was estimated to produce 10% of all greenhouse gas emissions in 2020, which was larger than the emissions produced by international flights and maritime shipping combined. According to a 2017 report from the Ellen MacArthur Foundation , if the fashion sector persists on its same trajectory, its share of global carbon emissions could increase to 26% by 2050. [83] [84] [85] The production and distribution of the crops, fibers, and garments used in fashion all contribute to differing forms of environmental pollution , including water, air, and soil degradation .[ citation needed ] The textile industry is the second greatest polluter of local freshwater in the world, [86] and is culpable for roughly one-fifth of all industrial water pollution . [87] Some of the main factors that contribute to this industrial caused pollution are the vast overproduction of fashion items,[ citation needed ] the use of synthetic fibers , the agriculture pollution of fashion crops, [88] and the proliferation of microfibers across global water sources. [82] Efforts have been made by some retailers and consumers to promote sustainable fashion practices, such as reducing waste, improving energy and water efficiency, and using primarily eco-friendly materials. Counter movements, such as slow fashion, have also developed as a response to the growth of fast fashion.[ citation needed ] Media Latin dancers in their costumes . The woman is wearing backless dress with deep slits on its lower portion, while the man is wearing a shirt with top buttons open. The media plays a significant role when it comes to fashion. For instance, an important part of fashion is fashion journalism . Editorial critique, guidelines, and commentary can be found on television and in magazines, newspapers, fashion websites, social networks, and fashion blogs . In recent years, fashion blogging and YouTube videos have become a major outlet for spreading trends and fashion tips, creating an online culture of sharing one's style on a website or social media accounts (i.e. Instagram, TikTok, or Twitter). Through these media outlets, readers and viewers all over the world can learn about fashion, making it very accessible. [89] In addition to fashion journalism, another media platform that is important in fashion industry is advertisement. Advertisements provide information to audiences and promote the sales of products and services. The fashion industry uses advertisements to attract consumers and promote its products to generate sales. A few decades ago when technology was still underdeveloped, advertisements heavily relied on radio, magazines, billboards, and newspapers. [90] These days, there are more various ways in advertisements such as television ads, online-based ads using internet websites, and posts, videos, and live streaming in social media platforms. Fashion in printed media This 1921 clipping from the St. Louis Post-Dispatch , with story and drawings by Marguerite Martyn , represents the saturation newspaper coverage given to society women at a fashionable dance. There are two subsets of print styling: editorial and lifestyle. Editorial styling is the high-fashion styling seen in fashion magazines, and this tends to be more artistic and fashion-forward. Lifestyle styling focuses on a more overtly commercial goal, like a department store advertisement, a website, or an advertisement where fashion is not what's being sold but the models are hired to promote the product in the photo. [91] The dressing practices of the powerful have traditionally been mediated through art and the practices of the courts. The looks of the French court were disseminated through prints from the 16th century on, but gained cohesive design with the development of a centralized court under King Louis XIV , which produced an identifiable style that took his name . [92] At the beginning of the 20th century, fashion magazines began to include photographs of various fashion designs and became even more influential than in the past. [93] In cities throughout the world these magazines were greatly sought after and had a profound effect on public taste in clothing. Talented illustrators drew exquisite fashion plates for the publications which covered the most recent developments in fashion and beauty. Perhaps the most famous of these magazines was La Gazette du Bon Ton , which was founded in 1912 by Lucien Vogel and regularly published until 1925 (with the exception of the war years). [94] A see-through top worn along with pasties by a model at a fashion show in US, 2017. Such fashion trends get popularised through media. Vogue, founded in Manhattan in 1892, has been the longest-lasting and most successful of the hundreds of fashion magazines that have come and gone. Increasing affluence after World War II and, most importantly, the advent of cheap color printing in the 1960s, led to a huge boost in its sales and heavy coverage of fashion in mainstream women's magazines, followed by men's magazines in the 1990s. One such example of Vogue's popularity is the younger version, Teen Vogue , which covers clothing and trends that are targeted more toward the "fashionista on a budget". Haute couture designers followed the trend by starting ready-to-wear and perfume lines which are heavily advertised in the magazines and now dwarf their original couture businesses. A recent development within fashion print media is the rise of text-based and critical magazines which aim to prove that fashion is not superficial, by creating a dialogue between fashion academia and the industry. Examples of this development are: Fashion Theory (1997), Fashion Practice: The Journal of Design, Creative Process & the Fashion Industry (2008), and Vestoj (2009). Fashion in television Television coverage began in the 1950s with small fashion features. In the 1960s and 1970s, fashion segments on various entertainment shows became more frequent, and by the 1980s, dedicated fashion shows such as Fashion Television started to appear. FashionTV was the pioneer in this undertaking and has since grown to become the leader in both Fashion Television and new media channels. The Fashion Industry is beginning to promote their styles through Bloggers on social media's. Vogue specified Chiara Ferragni as "blogger of the moment" due to the rises of followers through her Fashion Blog, that became popular. [95] A few days after the 2010 Fall Fashion Week in New York City came to a close, The New Islander 's Fashion Editor, Genevieve Tax, criticized the fashion industry for running on a seasonal schedule of its own, largely at the expense of real-world consumers. "Because designers release their fall collections in the spring and their spring collections in the fall, fashion magazines such as Vogue always and only look forward to the upcoming season, promoting parkas come September while issuing reviews on shorts in January", she writes. "Savvy shoppers, consequently, have been conditioned to be extremely, perhaps impractically, farsighted with their buying." [96] The fashion industry has been the subject of numerous films and television shows, including the reality show Project Runway and the drama series Ugly Betty . Specific fashion brands have been featured in film, not only as product placement opportunities, but as bespoke items that have subsequently led to trends in fashion. [97] Videos in general have been very useful in promoting the fashion industry. This is evident not only from television shows directly spotlighting the fashion industry, but also movies, events and music videos which showcase fashion statements as well as promote specific brands through product placements. Controversial advertisements in fashion industry Racism in fashion advertisements Some fashion advertisements have been accused of racism and led to boycotts from customers. Globally known Swedish fashion brand H&M faced this issue with one of its children's wear advertisements in 2018. A Black child wearing a hoodie with the slogan "coolest monkey in the jungle" was featured in the ad. This immediately led to controversy, as "monkey" is commonly used as slur against Black people , and caused many customers to boycott the brand. Many people, including celebrities, posted on social media about their resentments towards H&M and refusal to work with and buy its products. H&M issued a statement saying "we apologise to anyone this may have offended", though this too received some criticism for appearing insincere. [98] Another fashion advertisement seen as racist was from GAP , an American worldwide clothing brand. GAP collaborated with Ellen DeGeneres in 2016 for the advertisement. It features four playful young girls, with a tall White girl leaning with her arm on a shorter Black girl's head. Upon release, some viewers harshly criticized it, claiming it shows an underlying passive racism. A representative from The Root commented that the ad portrays the message that Black people are undervalued and seen as props for White people to look better. [99] Others saw little issue with the ad, and that the controversy was the result of people being oversensitive . GAP replaced the image in the ad and apologized to critics. [100] Sexism in fashion advertisements Many fashion brands have published ads that were provocative and sexy to attract customers' attention. British high fashion brand, Jimmy Choo, was blamed for having sexism in its ad which featured a female British model wearing the brand's boots. In this two-minute ad, men whistle at a model, walking on the street with red, sleeveless mini dress. This ad gained much backlash and criticism by the viewers, as it was seen as promoting sexual harassment and other misconduct. Many people showed their dismay through social media posts, leading Jimmy Choo to pull down the ad from social media platforms. [101] French luxury fashion brand Yves Saint Laurent also faced this issue with its print ad shown in Paris in 2017. The ad depicted a female model wearing fishnet tights with roller-skate stilettos reclining with her legs opened in front of the camera. This advertisement brought harsh comments from both viewers and French advertising organization directors for going against the advertising codes related to "respect for decency, dignity and those prohibiting submission, violence or dependence, as well as the use of stereotypes." and additionally said that this ad was causing "mental harm to adolescents." [102] Due to the negative public reaction, the poster was removed from the city. Public relations and social media A Mexican sports reporter wearing little black dress and knee-high boots Fashion public relations involves being in touch with a company's audiences and creating strong relationships with them, reaching out to media, and initiating messages that project positive images of the company. [103] Social media plays an important role in modern-day fashion public relations; enabling practitioners to reach a wide range of consumers through various platforms. [104] Building brand awareness and credibility is a key implication of good public relations. In some cases, the hype is built about new designers' collections before they are released into the market, due to the immense exposure generated by practitioners. [105] Social media, such as blogs, microblogs, podcasts, photo and video sharing sites have all become increasingly important to fashion public relations. [106] The interactive nature of these platforms allows practitioners to engage and communicate with the public in real-time, and tailor their clients' brand or campaign messages to the target audience. With blogging platforms such as Instagram, Tumblr, WordPress, Squarespace, and other sharing sites, bloggers have emerged as expert fashion commentators, shaping brands and having a great impact on what is 'on trend'. [107] Women in the fashion public relations industry such as Sweaty Betty PR founder Roxy Jacenko and Oscar de la Renta's PR girl Erika Bearman, have acquired copious followers on their social media sites, by providing a brand identity and a behind the scenes look into the companies they work for. Social media is changing the way practitioners deliver messages, [30] as they are concerned with the media, and also customer relationship building. [108] PR practitioners must provide effective communication among all platforms, in order to engage the fashion public in an industry socially connected via online shopping. [109] Consumers have the ability to share their purchases on their personal social media pages (such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, etc.), and if practitioners deliver the brand message effectively and meet the needs of its public, word-of-mouth publicity will be generated and potentially provide a wide reach for the designer and their products. Fashion and political activism Further information: Fashion activism As fashion concerns people, and signifies social hierarchies, fashion intersects with politics and the social organization of societies. Whereas haute couture and business suits are associated by people in power, also groups aiming to challenge the political order also use clothes to signal their position. The explicit use of fashion as a form of activism, is usually referred to as " fashion activism ." There is a complex relationship between fashion and feminism. Some feminists have argued that by participating in feminine fashions women are contributing to maintaining the gender differences which are part of women's oppression. [110] Brownmiller felt that women should reject traditionally feminine dress, focusing on comfort and practicality rather than fashion. [110] Others believe that it is the fashion system itself that is repressive in requiring women to seasonally change their clothes to keep up with trends. [111] Greer has advocated this argument that seasonal changes in dress should be ignored; she argues that women can be liberated by replacing the compulsiveness of fashion with enjoyment of rejecting the norm to create their own personal styling. [112] This rejection of seasonal fashion led to many protests in the 1960s alongside rejection of fashion on socialist, racial and environmental grounds. [113] However, Mosmann has pointed out that the relationship between protesting fashion and creating fashion is dynamic because the language and style used in these protests has then become part of fashion itself. [113] Fashion designers and brands have traditionally kept themselves out of political conflicts, there has been a movement in the industry towards taking more explicit positions across the political spectrum. From maintaining a rather apolitical stance, designers and brands today engage more explicitly in current debates. [114] For example, considering the U.S.'s political climate in the surrounding months of the 2016 presidential election , during 2017 fashion weeks in London , Milan , New York , Paris and São Paulo amongst others, many designers took the opportunity to take political stances leveraging their platforms and influence to reach their customers. [115] [116] This has also led to some controversy over democratic values, as fashion is not always the most inclusive platform for political debate, but a one-way broadcast of top-down messages. When taking an explicit political stance, designers generally favor issues that can be identified in clear language with virtuous undertones. For example, aiming to "amplify a greater message of unity, inclusion, diversity, and feminism in a fashion space", designer Mara Hoffman invited the founders of the Women's March on Washington to open her show which featured modern silhouettes of utilitarian wear, described by critics as "Made for a modern warrior" and "Clothing for those who still have work to do". [117] Prabal Gurung debuted his collection of T-shirts featuring slogans such as "The Future is Female", "We Will Not Be Silenced", and "Nevertheless She Persisted", with proceeds going to the ACLU , Planned Parenthood , and Gurung's own charity, "Shikshya Foundation Nepal". [114] Similarly, The Business of Fashion launched the #TiedTogether movement on Social Media, encouraging member of the industry from editors to models, to wear a white bandana advocating for "unity, solidarity, and inclusiveness during fashion week". [118] Fashion may be used to promote a cause, such as to promote healthy behavior, [119] to raise money for a cancer cure, [120] or to raise money for local charities [121] such as the Juvenile Protective Association [122] or a children's hospice . [123] One fashion cause is trashion , which is using trash to make clothes, jewelry , and other fashion items in order to promote awareness of pollution. There are a number of modern trashion artists such as Marina DeBris , Ann Wizer, [124] and Nancy Judd. [125] Other designers have used DIY fashions, in the tradition of the punk movement, to address elitism in the industry to promote more inclusion and diversity. [126] Anthropological perspective From an academic lens, the sporting of various fashions has been seen as a form of fashion language, a mode of communication that produced various fashion statements, using a grammar of fashion. [127] This is a perspective promoted in the work of influential French philosopher and semiotician Roland Barthes . Anthropology , the study of culture and of human societies, examines fashion by asking why certain styles are deemed socially appropriate and others are not. From the theory of interactionism, a certain practice or expression is chosen by those in power in a community, and that becomes "the fashion" as defined at a certain time by the people under influence of those in power. If a particular style has a meaning in an already occurring set of beliefs , then that style may have a greater chance of become fashion. [128] According to cultural theorists Ted Polhemus and Lynn Procter, one can describe fashion as adornment , of which there are two types: fashion and anti-fashion . Through the capitalization and commoditization of clothing, accessories, and shoes, etc., what once constituted anti-fashion becomes part of fashion as the lines between fashion and anti-fashion are blurred, as expressions that were once outside the changes of fashion are swept along with trends to signify new meanings. [129] Examples range from how elements from ethnic dress becomes part of a trend and appear on catwalks or street cultures, for example how tattoos travel from sailors, laborers and criminals to popular culture. To cultural theorist Malcolm Bernard, fashion and anti-fashion differ as polar opposites. Anti-fashion is fixed and changes little over time, [130] varying depending on the cultural or social group one is associated with or where one lives, but within that group or locality the style changes little. Fashion, in contrast, can change ( evolve ) very quickly [131] and is not affiliated with one group or area of the world but spreads throughout the world wherever people can communicate easily with each other. An example of anti-fashion would be ceremonial or otherwise traditional clothing where specific garments and their designs are both reproduced faithfully and with the intent of maintaining a status quo of tradition. This can be seen in the clothing of some kabuki plays, where some character outfits are kept intact from designs of several centuries ago, in some cases retaining the crests of the actors considered to have 'perfected' that role. Anti-fashion is concerned with maintaining the status quo, while fashion is concerned with social mobility . Time is expressed in terms of continuity in anti-fashion, and in terms of change in fashion; fashion has changing modes of adornment, while anti-fashion has fixed modes of adornment. From this theoretical lens, change in fashion is part of the larger industrial system and is structured by the powerful actors in this system to be a deliberate change in style, promoted through the channels influenced by the industry (such as paid advertisements). [132] Intellectual property Gross sales of goods vs IP laws (US 2007) In the fashion industry, intellectual property is not enforced as it is within the film industry and music industry . Robert Glariston, an intellectual property expert, mentioned in a fashion seminar held in LA[ which? ] that "Copyright law regarding clothing is a current hot-button issue in the industry. We often have to draw the line between designers being inspired by a design and those outright stealing it in different places." [133] To take inspiration from others' designs contributes to the fashion industry's ability to establish clothing trends. For the past few years, WGSN has been a dominant source of fashion news and forecasts in encouraging fashion brands worldwide to be inspired by one another. Enticing consumers to buy clothing by establishing new trends is, some have argued, a key component of the industry's success. Intellectual property rules that interfere with this process of trend-making would, in this view, be counter-productive. On the other hand, it is often argued that the blatant theft of new ideas, unique designs, and design details by larger companies is what often contributes to the failure of many smaller or independent design companies. Since fakes are distinguishable by their poorer quality, there is still a demand for luxury goods, and as only a trademark or logo can be copyrighted, many fashion brands make this one of the most visible aspects of the garment or accessory. In handbags, especially, the designer's brand may be woven into the fabric (or the lining fabric) from which the bag is made, making the brand an intrinsic element of the bag. In 2005, the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) held a conference calling for stricter intellectual property enforcement within the fashion industry to better protect small and medium businesses and promote competitiveness within the textile and clothing industries. [134] [135] See also
Toggle the table of contents Cinema of the United States 45 languages From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Filmmaking industry in the United States "American Film" redirects here. For the magazine, see American Film (magazine) . Cinema of the United States(Hollywood) The Hollywood Sign in the Hollywood Hills , often regarded as the symbol of the American film industry 14 per 100,000 (2017) [1] Main distributors Produced feature films (2016) [2] Fictional Number of admissions (2017) [4] Total Gross box office (2017) [4] Total e The cinema of the United States, consisting mainly of major film studios (also known metonymously as Hollywood) along with some independent films , has had a large effect on the global film industry since the early 20th century. The dominant style of American cinema is classical Hollywood cinema , which developed from 1910 to 1962 and is still typical of most films made there to this day. While Frenchmen Auguste and Louis Lumière are generally credited with the birth of modern cinema, [5] American cinema soon came to be a dominant force in the emerging industry. With more than 600 English-language films released on average every year As of 2017 [update] , it produced the fourth-largest number of films of any national cinema , after India , Japan , and China . [6] While the national cinemas of the United Kingdom , Canada , Australia , and New Zealand also produce films in the same language, they are not part of the Hollywood system. Because of this, Hollywood has also been considered a transnational cinema , [7] and has produced multiple language versions of some titles, often in Spanish or French. Contemporary Hollywood often outsources production to the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. The major film studios of Hollywood are the primary source of the most commercially successful and most ticket-selling movies in the world. [8] [9] Hollywood is considered to be the oldest film industry, in the sense of being the place where the earliest film studios and production companies emerged. It is the birthplace of various genres of cinema[ citation needed ]—among them comedy , drama , action , the musical , romance , horror , science fiction ,[ dubious – discuss ] and the epic —and has set the example for other national film industries. During 1878, Eadweard Muybridge demonstrated the power of photography to capture motion. In 1894, the world's first commercial motion-picture exhibition was given in New York City, using Thomas Edison 's kinetoscope . [10] In the following decades, production of silent film greatly expanded, studios formed and migrated to California, and films and the stories they told became much longer. The United States produced the world's first sync-sound musical film , The Jazz Singer , in 1927, [11] and was at the forefront of sound-film development in the following decades. Since the early 20th century, the U.S. film industry has primarily been based in and around the thirty-mile zone centered in the Hollywood neighborhood of Los Angeles County, California . Director D. W. Griffith was central to the development of a film grammar . Orson Welles 's Citizen Kane (1941) is frequently cited in critics' polls as the greatest film of all time . [12] Many of Hollywood's highest-grossing movies have generated more box-office revenue and ticket sales outside the United States than films made elsewhere. The United States is a leading pioneer in motion picture engineering and technology . Justus D. Barnes as outlaw leader Bronco Billy Anderson in The Great Train Robbery (1903), considered by some to be the first Western . The first recorded instance of photographs capturing and reproducing motion was a series of photographs of a running horse by Eadweard Muybridge , which he took in Palo Alto, California , using a set of still cameras placed in a row. Muybridge's accomplishment led inventors everywhere to attempt to make similar devices. In the United States, Thomas Edison was among the first to produce such a device, the kinetoscope .[ citation needed ] Harold Lloyd in the clock scene from Safety Last! (1923) The history of cinema in the United States can trace its roots to the East Coast where, at one time, Fort Lee, New Jersey , was the motion-picture capital of America. The industry got its start at the end of the 19th century with the construction of Thomas Edison's " Black Maria ", the first motion-picture studio in West Orange, New Jersey . The cities and towns on the Hudson River and Hudson Palisades offered land at costs considerably less than New York City across the river and benefited greatly as a result of the phenomenal growth of the film industry at the turn of the 20th century. [13] [14] [15] The industry began attracting both capital and an innovative workforce. In 1907, when the Kalem Company began using Fort Lee as a location for filming in the area, other filmmakers quickly followed. In 1909, a forerunner of Universal Studios , the Champion Film Company , built the first studio. [16] Others quickly followed and either built new studios or leased facilities in Fort Lee. In the 1910s and 1920s , film companies such as the Independent Moving Pictures Company, Peerless Studios , The Solax Company , Éclair Studios , Goldwyn Picture Corporation , American Méliès (Star Films), World Film Company , Biograph Studios , Fox Film Corporation , Pathé Frères , Metro Pictures Corporation , Victor Film Company , and Selznick Pictures Corporation were all making pictures in Fort Lee. Such notables as Mary Pickford got their start at Biograph Studios. [17] [18] [19] In New York, the Kaufman Astoria Studios in Queens , which was built during the silent film era, was used by the Marx Brothers and W.C. Fields . The Edison Studios were located in the Bronx. Chelsea, Manhattan , was also frequently used. Other Eastern cities, most notably Chicago and Cleveland , also served as early centers for film production. [20] [21] In the West, California was already quickly emerging as a major film production center. In Colorado , Denver was home to the Art-O-Graf film company, and Walt Disney 's early Laugh-O-Gram animation studio was based in Kansas City , Missouri . Picture City , Florida , was a planned site for a movie picture production center in the 1920s, but due to the 1928 Okeechobee hurricane , the idea collapsed and Picture City returned to its original name of Hobe Sound . An attempt to establish a film production center in Detroit also proved unsuccessful. [23] The film patents wars of the early 20th century helped facilitate the spread of film companies to other parts of the US, outside New York. Many filmmakers worked with equipment for which they did not own the rights to use. Therefore, filming in New York could be dangerous as it was close to Edison's company headquarters, and close to the agents who the company set out to seize cameras. By 1912, most major film companies had set up production facilities in Southern California near or in Los Angeles because of the region's favorable year-round weather. [24] Rise of Hollywood[ edit ] "History of Hollywood" redirects here. For the history of the Los Angeles neighborhood, see Hollywood, Los Angeles § History . Laurel and Hardy with Lupe Vélez in Hollywood Party (1934) The 1908 Selig Polyscope Company production of The Count of Monte Cristo directed by Francis Boggs and starring Hobart Bosworth was claimed as the first to have been filmed in Los Angeles , in 1907, with a plaque being unveiled by the city in 1957 at Dearden's flagship store on the corner of Main Street and 7th Street, to mark the filming on the site when it had been a Chinese laundry. [25] Bosworth's widow suggested the city had got the date and location wrong, and that the film was actually shot in nearby Venice , which at the time was an independent city. [26] Boggs' In the Sultan's Power for Selig Polyscope, also starring Bosworth, is considered the first film shot entirely in Los Angeles, with shooting at 7th and Olive Streets in 1909. [27] [26] In early 1910, director D. W. Griffith was sent by the Biograph Company to the west coast with his acting troupe, consisting of actors Blanche Sweet , Lillian Gish , Mary Pickford , Lionel Barrymore and others. They started filming on a vacant lot near Georgia Street in downtown Los Angeles. While there, the company decided to explore new territories, traveling several miles north to Hollywood, a little village that was friendly and enjoyed the movie company filming there. Griffith then filmed the first movie ever shot in Hollywood, In Old California , a Biograph melodrama about California in the 19th century, when it belonged to Mexico. Griffith stayed there for months and made several films before returning to New York. Also in 1910, Selig Polyscope of Chicago established the first film studio in the Los Angeles area in Edendale [25] and the first studio in Hollywood opened in 1912. [28] : 447 After hearing about Griffith's success in Hollywood, in 1913, many movie-makers headed west to avoid the fees imposed by Thomas Edison , who owned patents on the movie-making process. [29] Nestor Studios of Bayonne, New Jersey , built the first studio in the Hollywood neighborhood in 1911.[ dubious – discuss ] Nestor Studios, owned by David and William Horsley, later merged with Universal Studios; and William Horsley's other company, Hollywood Film Laboratory, is now the oldest existing company in Hollywood, now called the Hollywood Digital Laboratory. California 's more hospitable and cost-effective climate led to the eventual shift of virtually all filmmaking to the West Coast by the 1930s. At the time, Thomas Edison owned almost all the patents relevant to motion picture production and movie producers on the East Coast acting independently of Edison's Motion Picture Patents Company were often sued or enjoined by Edison and his agents while movie makers working on the West Coast could work independently of Edison's control. [30] The Hollywood Walk of Fame on Hollywood Boulevard In Los Angeles, the studios and Hollywood grew. Before World War I , films were made in several American cities, but filmmakers tended to gravitate towards southern California as the industry developed. They were attracted by the warm climate and reliable sunlight, which made it possible to film their films outdoors year-round and by the varied scenery that was available.[ citation needed ] War damage contributed to the decline of the then-dominant European film industry, in favor of the United States, where infrastructure was still intact. [31] The stronger early public health response to the 1918 flu epidemic by Los Angeles [32] compared to other American cities reduced the number of cases there and resulted in a faster recovery, contributing to the increasing dominance of Hollywood over New York City. [31] During the pandemic, public health officials temporarily closed movie theaters in some jurisdictions, large studios suspended production for weeks at a time, and some actors came down with the flu. This caused major financial losses and severe difficulties for small studios, but the industry as a whole more than recovered during the Roaring Twenties . [33] In the early 20th century, when the medium was new, many Jewish immigrants found employment in the US film industry. They were able to make their mark in a brand-new business: the exhibition of short films in storefront theaters called nickelodeons , after their admission price of a nickel (five cents). Within a few years, ambitious men like Samuel Goldwyn , William Fox , Carl Laemmle , Adolph Zukor , Louis B. Mayer , and the Warner Brothers (Harry, Albert, Samuel, and Jack) had switched to the production side of the business. Soon they were the heads of a new kind of enterprise: the movie studio . The US had at least two female directors, producers and studio heads in these early years: Lois Weber and French-born Alice Guy-Blaché . They also set the stage for the industry's internationalism; the industry is often accused of Amerocentric provincialism . Other moviemakers arrived from Europe after World War I: directors like Ernst Lubitsch , Alfred Hitchcock , Fritz Lang and Jean Renoir ; and actors like Rudolph Valentino , Marlene Dietrich , Ronald Colman , and Charles Boyer . They joined a homegrown supply of actors—lured west from the New York City stage after the introduction of sound films—to form one of the 20th century's most remarkable growth industries. At motion pictures' height of popularity in the mid-1940s, the studios were cranking out a total of about 400 movies a year, seen by an audience of 90 million Americans per week. [34] Buster Keaton in costume with his signature pork pie hat , c. 1939 Sound also became widely used in Hollywood in the late 1920s. [35] After The Jazz Singer , the first film with synchronized voices was successfully released as a Vitaphone talkie in 1927, Hollywood film companies would respond to Warner Bros. and begin to use Vitaphone sound—which Warner Bros. owned until 1928—in future films. By May 1928, Electrical Research Product Incorporated (ERPI), a subsidiary of the Western Electric company, gained a monopoly over film sound distribution. [34] A side effect of the "talkies" was that many actors who had made their careers in silent films suddenly found themselves out of work, as they often had bad voices or could not remember their lines. Meanwhile, in 1922, US politician Will H. Hays left politics and formed the movie studio boss organization known as the Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of America (MPPDA). [36] The organization became the Motion Picture Association of America after Hays retired in 1945. In the early times of talkies , American studios found that their sound productions were rejected in foreign-language markets and even among speakers of other dialects of English. The synchronization technology was still too primitive for dubbing . One of the solutions was creating parallel foreign-language versions of Hollywood films. Around 1930, the American companies[ which? ] opened a studio in Joinville-le-Pont , France, where the same sets and wardrobe and even mass scenes were used for different time-sharing crews. Also, foreign unemployed actors, playwrights, and winners of photogenia contests were chosen and brought to Hollywood, where they shot parallel versions of the English-language films. These parallel versions had a lower budget, were shot at night and were directed by second-line American directors who did not speak the foreign language. The Spanish-language crews included people like Luis Buñuel , Enrique Jardiel Poncela , Xavier Cugat , and Edgar Neville . The productions were not very successful in their intended markets, due to the following reasons: Brown Derby , an icon that became synonymous with the Golden Age of Hollywood. The lower budgets were apparent. Many theater actors had no previous experience in cinema. The original movies were often second-rate themselves since studios expected that the top productions would sell by themselves. The mix of foreign accents (Castilian, Mexican, and Chilean for example in the Spanish case) was odd for the audiences. Some markets lacked sound-equipped theaters. Classical Hollywood cinema and the Golden Age of Hollywood[ edit ] Stars of the Classical Hollywood cinema era ( c. 1913–1962).  Top row, l-r: Greta Garbo , Humphrey Bogart , Lauren Bacall , Clark Gable , Katharine Hepburn , Fred Astaire , Ginger Rogers , Marlon Brando , the Marx Brothers , Joan Crawford .  Second row, l-r: John Wayne , James Stewart , Buster Keaton , Claudette Colbert , Gene Kelly , Burt Lancaster , Judy Garland , Gregory Peck , Elizabeth Taylor , Kirk Douglas .  Third row, l-r: Bette Davis , Audrey Hepburn , Jean Harlow , Alfred Hitchcock , John Ford , Howard Hawks , Grace Kelly , Laurence Olivier , Marlene Dietrich , James Cagney .  Fourth row, l-r: Ava Gardner , Cary Grant , Ingrid Bergman , Henry Fonda , Marilyn Monroe , James Dean , Orson Welles , Mae West , William Holden , Sophia Loren .  Bottom row, l-r: Vivien Leigh , Joan Fontaine and Gary Cooper , Spencer Tracy , Barbara Stanwyck , Lillian Gish , Tyrone Power , Shirley Temple , Janet Leigh with Charlton Heston , Rita Hayworth , Mary Pickford . Classical Hollywood cinema, or the Golden Age of Hollywood, is defined as a technical and narrative style characteristic of American cinema from 1913 to 1962, during which thousands of movies were issued from the Hollywood studios. The Classical style began to emerge in 1913, was accelerated in 1917 after the U.S. entered World War I , and finally solidified when the film The Jazz Singer was released in 1927, ending the silent film era and increasing box-office profits for film industry by introducing sound to feature films. Most Hollywood pictures adhered closely to a formula – Western , slapstick comedy , musical , animated cartoon , biographical – and the same creative teams often worked on films made by the same studio. For example, Cedric Gibbons and Herbert Stothart always worked on MGM films, Alfred Newman worked at 20th Century Fox for twenty years, Cecil B. De Mille 's films were almost all made at Paramount , and director Henry King 's films were mostly made for 20th Century Fox . At the same time, one could usually guess which studio made which film, largely because of the actors who appeared in it; MGM , for example, claimed it had contracted "more stars than there are in heaven." Each studio had its own style and characteristic touches which made it possible to know this – a trait that rarely exists today. For example, To Have and Have Not (1944) is notable not only for the first pairing of actors Humphrey Bogart (1899–1957) and Lauren Bacall (1924–2014), but because it was written by two future winners of the Nobel Prize in Literature : Ernest Hemingway (1899–1961), the author of the novel on which the script was nominally based, and William Faulkner (1897–1962), who worked on the screen adaptation. After The Jazz Singer was released in 1927, Warner Bros. gained huge success and were able to acquire their own string of movie theaters, after purchasing Stanley Theaters and First National Productions in 1928. In contrast Loews theaters owned MGM since forming in 1924, while the Fox Film Corporation owned the Fox Theatre . RKO (a 1928 merger between Keith-Orpheum Theaters and the Radio Corporation of America [37] ) also responded to the Western Electric/ERPI monopoly over sound in films, and developed their own method, known as Photophone , to put sound in films. [34] Paramount, which acquired Balaban and Katz in 1926, would answer to the success of Warner Bros. and RKO, and buy a number of theaters in the late 1920s as well, and would hold a monopoly on theaters in Detroit, Michigan . [38] By the 1930s, almost all of the first-run metropolitan theaters in the United States were owned by the Big Five studios— MGM , Paramount Pictures , RKO , Warner Bros. , and 20th Century Fox . [39] Rise and decline of the studio system[ edit ] Hollywood movie studios, 1922 Motion picture companies operated under the studio system . The major studios kept thousands of people on salary—actors, producers, directors, writers, stunt men, crafts persons, and technicians. They owned or leased Movie Ranches in rural Southern California for location shooting of westerns and other large-scale genre films, and the major studios owned hundreds of theaters in cities and towns across the nation in 1920 film theaters that showed their films and that were always in need of fresh material. Spencer Tracy was the first actor to win Best Actor award over two consecutive years for his roles in Captains Courageous (1937) and Boys Town (1938) (and received seven other nominations). In 1930, MPPDA President Will Hays created the Hays (Production) Code , which followed censorship guidelines and went into effect after government threats of censorship expanded by 1930. [40] However, the code was never enforced until 1934, after the Catholic watchdog organization The Legion of Decency —appalled by some of the provocative films and lurid advertising of the era later classified Pre-Code Hollywood - threatened a boycott of motion pictures if it did not go into effect. [41] The films that did not obtain a seal of approval from the Production Code Administration had to pay a $25,000 fine and could not profit in the theaters, as the MPPDA controlled every theater in the country through the Big Five studios. Throughout the 1930s, as well as most of the golden age, MGM dominated the film screen and had the top stars in Hollywood, and they were also credited for creating the Hollywood star system altogether. [42] Some MGM stars included "King of Hollywood" Clark Gable , Lionel Barrymore , Jean Harlow , Norma Shearer , Greta Garbo , Joan Crawford , Jeanette MacDonald , Gene Raymond , Spencer Tracy , Judy Garland , and Gene Kelly . [42] But MGM did not stand alone. Another great achievement of American cinema during this era came through Walt Disney's animation company . In 1937, Disney created the most successful film of its time, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs . [43] This distinction was promptly topped in 1939 when Selznick International created what is still, when adjusted for inflation, the most successful film of all time in Gone with the Wind . [44] Many film historians have remarked upon the many great works of cinema that emerged from this period of highly regimented filmmaking. One reason this was possible is that, with so many movies being made, not every one had to be a big hit. A studio could gamble on a medium-budget feature with a good script and relatively unknown actors: Citizen Kane , directed by Orson Welles (1915–1985) and often regarded as the greatest film of all time , fits this description. In other cases, strong-willed directors like Howard Hawks (1896–1977), Alfred Hitchcock (1899–1980), and Frank Capra (1897–1991) battled the studios in order to achieve their artistic visions. The apogee of the studio system may have been the year 1939, which saw the release of such classics as The Wizard of Oz , Gone with the Wind , Stagecoach , Mr. Smith Goes to Washington , Wuthering Heights , Only Angels Have Wings , Ninotchka and Midnight . Among the other films from the Golden Age period that are now considered to be classics: Casablanca , It's a Wonderful Life , It Happened One Night , the original King Kong , Mutiny on the Bounty , Top Hat , City Lights , Red River , The Lady from Shanghai , Rear Window , On the Waterfront , Rebel Without a Cause , Some Like It Hot , and The Manchurian Candidate . Percentage of the US population that went to the cinema on average, weekly, 1930–2000 Walt Disney introduces each of the seven dwarfs in a scene from the original 1937 Snow White movie trailer. The studio system and the Golden Age of Hollywood succumbed to two forces that developed in the late 1940s: a federal antitrust action that separated the production of films from their exhibition; and the advent of television . In 1938, Walt Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released during a run of lackluster films from the major studios, and quickly became the highest grossing film released to that point. Embarrassingly for the studios, it was an independently produced animated film that did not feature any studio-employed stars. [45] This stoked already widespread frustration at the practice of block-booking , in which studios would only sell an entire year's schedule of films at a time to theaters and use the lock-in to cover for releases of mediocre quality. Assistant Attorney General Thurman Arnold —a noted " trust buster " of the Roosevelt administration—took this opportunity to initiate proceedings against the eight largest Hollywood studios in July 1938 for violations of the Sherman Antitrust Act . [46] [47] The federal suit resulted in five of the eight studios (the "Big Five": Warner Bros. , MGM , Fox , RKO and Paramount ) reaching a compromise with Arnold in October 1940 and signing a consent decree agreeing to, within three years: Eliminate the block-booking of short film subjects, in an arrangement known as "one shot", or "full force" block-booking. Eliminate the block-booking of any more than five features in their theaters. No longer engage in blind buying (or the buying of films by theater districts without seeing films beforehand) and instead have trade-showing, in which all 31 theater districts in the US would see films every two weeks before showing movies in theaters. Set up an administration board in each theater district to enforce these requirements. [46] Humphrey Bogart with Ingrid Bergman in Casablanca (1942)s. The "Little Three" ( Universal Studios , United Artists , and Columbia Pictures ), who did not own any theaters, refused to participate in the consent decree. [46] [47] A number of independent film producers were also unhappy with the compromise and formed a union known as the Society of Independent Motion Picture Producers and sued Paramount for the monopoly they still had over the Detroit Theaters—as Paramount was also gaining dominance through actors like Bob Hope, Paulette Goddard, Veronica Lake, Betty Hutton, crooner Bing Crosby, Alan Ladd, and longtime actor for studio Gary Cooper too- by 1942. The Big Five studios did not meet the requirements of the Consent of Decree during WWII, without major consequence, but after the war ended they joined Paramount as defendants in the Hollywood antitrust case, as did the Little Three studios. [48] The United States Supreme Court eventually ruled in United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc. that the major studios ownership of theaters and film distribution was a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act . As a result, the studios began to release actors and technical staff from their contracts with the studios. This changed the paradigm of film making by the major Hollywood studios, as each could have an entirely different cast and creative team. The decision resulted in the gradual loss of the characteristics which made Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Paramount Pictures, Universal Studios, Columbia Pictures, RKO Pictures, and 20th Century Fox films immediately identifiable. Certain movie people, such as Cecil B. DeMille , either remained contract artists until the end of their careers or used the same creative teams on their films so that a DeMille film still looked like one whether it was made in 1932 or 1956. New Hollywood and post-classical cinema[ edit ] Main article: New Hollywood Director and producer Steven Spielberg , co-founder of DreamWorks Studios and Amblin Entertainment, Inc Post-classical cinema is the changing methods of storytelling in the New Hollywood. It has been argued that new approaches to drama and characterization played upon audience expectations acquired in the classical period: chronology may be scrambled, storylines may feature " twist endings ", and lines between the antagonist and protagonist may be blurred. The roots of post-classical storytelling may be seen in film noir, in Rebel Without a Cause (1955), and in Hitchcock's storyline-shattering Psycho . The New Hollywood is the emergence of a new generation of film school-trained directors who had absorbed the techniques developed in Europe in the 1960s as a result of the French New Wave; the 1967 film Bonnie and Clyde marked the beginning of American cinema rebounding as well, as a new generation of films would afterwards gain success at the box offices as well. [49] Filmmakers like Francis Ford Coppola , Steven Spielberg , George Lucas , Brian De Palma , Stanley Kubrick , Martin Scorsese , Roman Polanski , and William Friedkin came to produce fare that paid homage to the history of film and developed upon existing genres and techniques. Inaugurated by the 1969 release of Andy Warhol 's Blue Movie , the phenomenon of adult erotic films being publicly discussed by celebrities (like Johnny Carson and Bob Hope ), [50] and taken seriously by critics (like Roger Ebert ), [51] [52] a development referred to, by Ralph Blumenthal of The New York Times , as " porno chic ", and later known as the Golden Age of Porn , began, for the first time, in modern American culture. [50] [53] [54] According to award-winning author Toni Bentley , Radley Metzger 's 1976 film The Opening of Misty Beethoven , based on the play Pygmalion by George Bernard Shaw (and its derivative, My Fair Lady ), and due to attaining a mainstream level in storyline and sets, [55] is considered the "crown jewel" of this ' Golden Age '. [56] [57] At the height of his fame in the early 1970s, Charles Bronson was the world's No. 1 box office attraction, commanding $1 million per film. [58] In the 1970s, the films of New Hollywood filmmakers were often both critically acclaimed and commercially successful. While the early New Hollywood films like Bonnie and Clyde and Easy Rider had been relatively low-budget affairs with amoral heroes and increased sexuality and violence, the enormous success enjoyed by Friedkin with The Exorcist , Spielberg with Jaws , Coppola with The Godfather and Apocalypse Now , Scorsese with Taxi Driver , Kubrick with 2001: A Space Odyssey , Polanski with Chinatown , and Lucas with American Graffiti and Star Wars , respectively helped to give rise to the modern " blockbuster ", and induced studios to focus ever more heavily on trying to produce enormous hits. [59] The increasing indulgence of these young directors did not help.[ citation needed ] Often, they would go overschedule, and overbudget, thus bankrupting themselves or the studio.[ citation needed ] The three most notable examples of this are Coppola's Apocalypse Now and One From The Heart and particularly Michael Cimino 's Heaven's Gate , which single-handedly bankrupted United Artists . However, Apocalypse Now eventually made its money back and gained widespread recognition as a masterpiece, winning the Palme d'Or at Cannes . [60] Rise of the modern blockbuster and independent films[ edit ] Tom Hanks has won two Academy Awards for Best Actor for his performances in "Philadelphia" and "Forrest Gump" and has starred in numerous beloved films such as "Saving Private Ryan," "Cast Away," and "Toy Story." This section is missing information about film as an artistic medium beyond being a form of technology or an entertainment product; cinematic styles such as, for instance, neo-noir and American Eccentric Cinema; Pixar; and the entire 1980s. Please expand the section to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page . (August 2023) In the US, the PG-13 rating was introduced in 1984 to accommodate films that straddled the line between PG and R, which was mainly due to the controversies surrounding the violent content of the PG films Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom and Gremlins (both 1984). [61] Film makers in the 1990s had access to technological, political and economic innovations that had not been available in previous decades. Dick Tracy (1990) became the first 35 mm feature film with a digital soundtrack. Batman Returns (1992) was the first film to make use of the Dolby Digital six-channel stereo sound that has since become the industry standard. Computer-generated imagery was greatly facilitated when it became possible to transfer film images into a computer and manipulate them digitally. The possibilities became apparent in director James Cameron 's Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991), in images of the shape-changing character T-1000 . Computer graphics or CG advanced to a point where Jurassic Park (1993) was able to use the techniques to create realistic looking animals. Jackpot (2001) became the first film that was shot entirely in digital. [62] In the film Titanic , Cameron wanted to push the boundary of special effects with his film, and enlisted Digital Domain and Pacific Data Images to continue the developments in digital technology which the director pioneered while working on The Abyss and Terminator 2: Judgment Day . Many previous films about the RMS Titanic shot water in slow motion , which did not look wholly convincing. [63] Cameron encouraged his crew to shoot their 45-foot-long (14 m) miniature of the ship as if "we're making a commercial for the White Star Line". American film industry (1995–2017) All values in billions
Chaucer reciting Troilus and Criseyde : early-15th-century manuscript of the work at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge Romance or chivalric romance is a type of narrative in prose or verse popular in the aristocratic circles of High Medieval and Early Modern Europe . They were marvel-filled adventures , often of a knight-errant with heroic qualities, who undertakes a quest , yet it is "the emphasis on heterosexual love and courtly manners distinguishes it from the chanson de geste and other kinds of epic , which involve heroism." [31] In later romances, particularly those of French origin, there is a marked tendency to emphasize themes of courtly love . Originally, romance literature was written in Old French , Anglo-Norman and Occitan , later, in English , Italian and German . During the early 13th century, romances were increasingly written as prose. The shift from verse to prose dates from the early 13th century; for example, the Romance of Flamenca . The Prose Lancelot or Vulgate Cycle also includes passages from that period. This collection indirectly led to Thomas Malory 's Le Morte d'Arthur of the early 1470s. Prose became increasingly attractive because it enabled writers to associate popular stories with serious histories traditionally composed in prose, and could also be more easily translated. [32] Popular literature also drew on themes of romance, but with ironic , satiric or burlesque intent. Romances reworked legends , fairy tales , and history, but by about 1600 they were out of fashion, and Miguel de Cervantes famously burlesqued them in Don Quixote (1605). Still, the modern image of the medieval is more influenced by the romance than by any other medieval genre, and the word "medieval" evokes knights, distressed damsels, dragons, and such tropes. [33] Main article: Novella The term "novel" originates from the production of short stories, or novella that remained part of a European oral culture of storytelling into the late 19th century. Fairy tales, jokes, and humorous stories designed to make a point in a conversation, and the exemplum a priest would insert in a sermon belong into this tradition. Written collections of such stories circulated in a wide range of products from practical compilations of examples designed for the use of clerics to compilations of various stories such as Boccaccio 's Decameron (1354) and Geoffrey Chaucer 's Canterbury Tales (1386–1400). The Decameron was a compilation of one hundred novelle told by ten people—seven women and three men—fleeing the Black Death by escaping from Florence to the Fiesole hills, in 1348. Renaissance period: 1500–1700[ edit ] 1474: The customer in the copyist's shop with a book he wants to have copied. This illustration of the first printed German Melusine looked back to the market of manuscripts. The modern distinction between history and fiction did not exist in the early sixteenth century and the grossest improbabilities pervade many historical accounts found in the early modern print market. William Caxton 's 1485 edition of Thomas Malory 's Le Morte d'Arthur (1471) was sold as a true history, though the story unfolded in a series of magical incidents and historical improbabilities. Sir John Mandeville 's Voyages, written in the 14th century, but circulated in printed editions throughout the 18th century, [34] was filled with natural wonders, which were accepted as fact, like the one-footed Ethiopians who use their extremity as an umbrella against the desert sun. Both works eventually came to be viewed as works of fiction. In the 16th and 17th centuries two factors led to the separation of history and fiction. The invention of printing immediately created a new market of comparatively cheap entertainment and knowledge in the form of chapbooks . The more elegant production of this genre by 17th- and 18th-century authors were belles lettres —that is, a market that would be neither low nor academic. The second major development was the first best-seller of modern fiction, the Spanish Amadis de Gaula , by García Montalvo. However, it was not accepted as an example of belles lettres. The Amadis eventually became the archetypical romance, in contrast with the modern novel which began to be developed in the 17th century. In Japan[ edit ] Many different genres of literature made their debut during the Edo period in Japan , helped by a rising literacy rate among the growing population of townspeople, as well as the development of lending libraries. Ihara Saikaku (1642–1693) might be said to have given birth to the modern consciousness of the novel in Japan, mixing vernacular dialogue into his humorous and cautionary tales of the pleasure quarters, the so-called Ukiyozōshi (" floating world ") genre. Ihara 's Life of an Amorous Man is considered the first work in this genre. Although Ihara's works were not regarded as high literature at the time because it had been aimed towards and popularized by the chōnin (merchant classes), they became popular and were key to the development and spread of ukiyozōshi. Main article: Chapbook A chapbook is an early type of popular literature printed in early modern Europe . Produced cheaply, chapbooks were commonly small, paper-covered booklets, usually printed on a single sheet folded into books of 8, 12, 16 and 24 pages. They were often illustrated with crude woodcuts , which sometimes bore no relation to the text. When illustrations were included in chapbooks, they were considered popular prints . The tradition arose in the 16th century, as soon as printed books became affordable, and rose to its height during the 17th and 18th centuries. Many different kinds of ephemera and popular or folk literature were published as chapbooks, such as almanacs , children's literature , folk tales , nursery rhymes , pamphlets , poetry , and political and religious tracts . [35] The term "chapbook" for this type of literature was coined in the 19th century. The corresponding French and German terms are bibliothèque bleue (blue book) and Volksbuch , respectively. [36] [37] [38] The principal historical subject matter of chapbooks was abridgements of ancient historians, popular medieval histories of knights, stories of comical heroes, religious legends, and collections of jests and fables. [39] The new printed books reached the households of urban citizens and country merchants who visited the cities as traders. Cheap printed histories were, in the 17th and 18th centuries, especially popular among apprentices and younger urban readers of both sexes. [40] The early modern market, from the 1530s and 1540s, divided into low chapbooks and high market expensive, fashionable, elegant belles lettres . The Amadis and Rabelais ' Gargantua and Pantagruel were important publications with respect to this divide. Both books specifically addressed the new customers of popular histories, rather than readers of belles lettres. The Amadis was a multi–volume fictional history of style, that aroused a debate about style and elegance as it became the first best-seller of popular fiction. On the other hand, Gargantua and Pantagruel, while it adopted the form of modern popular history, in fact satirized that genre's stylistic achievements. The division, between low and high literature, became especially visible with books that appeared on both the popular and belles lettres markets in the course of the 17th and 18th centuries: low  chapbooks included abridgments of books such as Don Quixote . The term "chapbook" is also in use for present-day publications, commonly short, inexpensive booklets. [35] Main articles: Heroic romances and 17th-century French literature Heroic Romance is a genre of imaginative literature, which flourished in the 17th century, principally in France. The beginnings of modern fiction in France took a pseudo- bucolic form, and the celebrated L'Astrée , (1610) of Honore d'Urfe (1568–1625), which is the earliest French novel, is properly styled a pastoral . Although its action was, in the main, languid and sentimental, there was a side of the Astree which encouraged that extravagant love of glory, that spirit of " panache", which was now rising to its height in France. That spirit it was which animated Marin le Roy de Gomberville (1603–1674), who was the inventor of what have since been known as the Heroical Romances. In these there was experienced a violent recrudescence of the old medieval elements of romance, the impossible valour devoted to a pursuit of the impossible beauty, but the whole clothed in the language and feeling and atmosphere of the age in which the books were written. In order to give point to the chivalrous actions of the heroes, it was always hinted that they were well-known public characters of the day in a romantic disguise. Richard Head , The English Rogue (1665) Stories of witty cheats were an integral part of the European novella with its tradition of fabliaux . Significant examples include Till Eulenspiegel (1510), Lazarillo de Tormes (1554), Grimmelshausen 's Simplicissimus Teutsch (1666–1668) and in England Richard Head 's The English Rogue (1665). The tradition that developed with these titles focused on a hero and his life. The adventures led to satirical encounters with the real world with the hero either becoming the pitiable victim or the rogue who exploited the vices of those he met. A second tradition of satirical romances can be traced back to Heinrich Wittenwiler 's Ring ( c. 1410) and to François Rabelais ' Gargantua and Pantagruel (1532–1564), which parodied and satirized heroic romances, and did this mostly by dragging them into the low realm of the burlesque. Don Quixote modified the satire of romances: its hero lost contact with reality by reading too many romances in the Amadisian tradition. Histories[ edit ] 1719 newspaper reprint of Robinson Crusoe A market of literature in the modern sense of the word, that is a separate market for fiction and poetry, did not exist until the late seventeenth century. All books were sold under the rubric of "History and politicks" in the early 18th century, including pamphlets , memoirs , travel literature , political analysis, serious histories, romances, poetry, and novels. That fictional histories shared the same space with academic histories and modern journalism had been criticized by historians since the end of the Middle Ages: fictions were "lies" and therefore hardly justifiable at all. The climate, however, changed in the 1670s. The romance format of the quasi–historical works of Madame d'Aulnoy , César Vichard de Saint-Réal , [42] Gatien de Courtilz de Sandras , [43] and Anne-Marguerite Petit du Noyer , allowed the publication of histories that dared not risk an unambiguous assertion of their truth. The literary market-place of the late 17th and early 18th century employed a simple pattern of options whereby fictions could reach out into the sphere of true histories. This permitted its authors to claim they had published fiction, not truth, if they ever faced allegations of libel. Prefaces and title pages of seventeenth and early eighteenth century fiction acknowledged this pattern: histories could claim to be romances, but threaten to relate true events, as in the Roman à clef . Other works could, conversely, claim to be factual histories, yet earn the suspicion that they were wholly invented. A further differentiation was made between private and public history: Daniel Defoe 's Robinson Crusoe was, within this pattern, neither a "romance" nor a "novel". It smelled of romance, yet the preface stated that it should most certainly be read as a true private history. [44] Cervantes and the modern novel[ edit ] See also: Picaresque novel The rise of the modern novel as an alternative to the chivalric romance began with the publication of Miguel de Cervantes ' novel Don Quixote : [45] [46] "the first great novel of world literature". [47] It continued with Scarron 's Roman Comique (the first part of which appeared in 1651), whose heroes noted the rivalry between French romances and the new Spanish genre. [48] In Germany an early example of the novel is Simplicius Simplicissimus by Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen , published in 1668, Late 17th-century critics looked back on the history of prose fiction, proud of the generic shift that had taken place, leading towards the modern novel/novella. [49] The first perfect works in French were those of Scarron and Madame de La Fayette 's "Spanish history" Zayde (1670). The development finally led to her Princesse de Clèves (1678), the first novel with what would become characteristic French subject matter. [50] [51] Europe witnessed the generic shift in the titles of works in French published in Holland, which supplied the international market and English publishers exploited the novel/romance controversy in the 1670s and 1680s. [52] Contemporary critics listed the advantages of the new genre: brevity, a lack of ambition to produce epic poetry in prose; the style was fresh and plain; the focus was on modern life, and on heroes who were neither good nor bad. [53] The novel's potential to become the medium of urban gossip and scandal fueled the rise of the novel/novella. Stories were offered as allegedly true recent histories, not for the sake of scandal but strictly for the moral lessons they gave. To prove this, fictionalized names were used with the true names in a separate key. The Mercure Gallant set the fashion in the 1670s. [54] Collections of letters and memoirs appeared, and were filled with the intriguing new subject matter and the epistolary novel grew from this and led to the first full blown example of scandalous fiction in Aphra Behn 's Love-Letters Between a Nobleman and His Sister (1684/ 1685/ 1687). Before the rise of the literary novel, reading novels had only been a form of entertainment. [55] However, one of the earliest English novels, Daniel Defoe 's Robinson Crusoe (1719), has elements of the romance, unlike these novels, because of its exotic setting and story of survival in isolation. Crusoe lacks almost all of the elements found in these new novels: wit, a fast narration evolving around a group of young fashionable urban heroes, along with their intrigues, a scandalous moral, gallant talk to be imitated, and a brief, concise plot.[ citation needed ] The new developments did, however, lead to Eliza Haywood 's epic length novel, Love in Excess (1719/20) and to Samuel Richardson 's Pamela, or Virtue Rewarded (1741).[ citation needed ] Some literary historians date the beginning of the English novel with Richardson's Pamela, rather than Crusoe. [56] Main article: Augustan prose The idea of the "rise of the novel" in the 18th century is especially associated with Ian Watt 's influential study The Rise of the Novel (1957). [57] In Watt's conception, a rise in fictional realism during the 18th century came to distinguish the novel from earlier prose narratives. [58]
Prehistoric cave painting of aurochs ( French : Bos primigenius primigenius), Lascaux , France The oldest known figurative painting is a depiction of a bull that was discovered in the Lubang Jeriji Saléh cave in Indonesia . It was painted 40,000–52,000 years ago or earlier. The oldest known paintings are approximately 40,000 years old, found in both the Franco-Cantabrian region in western Europe, and in the caves in the district of Maros ( Sulawesi , Indonesia ). In November 2018, however, scientists reported the discovery of the then-oldest known figurative art painting, over 40,000 (perhaps as old as 52,000) years old, of an unknown animal, in the cave of Lubang Jeriji Saléh on the Indonesian island of Borneo ( Kalimantan ). [4] [5] In December 2019, figurative cave paintings depicting pig hunting in the Maros-Pangkep karst in Sulawesi were estimated to be even older, at at least 43,900 years old. The finding was noted to be "the oldest pictorial record of storytelling and the earliest figurative artwork in the world". [6] [7] More recently, in 2021, cave art of a pig found in an Indonesian island, and dated to over 45,500 years, has been reported. [8] [9] However, the earliest evidence of the act of painting has been discovered in two rock-shelters in Arnhem Land , in northern Australia. In the lowest layer of material at these sites, there are used pieces of ochre estimated to be 60,000 years old. Archaeologists have also found a fragment of rock painting preserved in a limestone rock-shelter in the Kimberley region of North-Western Australia, that is dated to 40,000 years old. [10] There are examples of cave paintings all over the world—in Indonesia , France , Spain , Portugal , Italy , China , India , Australia , Mexico , [11] etc. In Western cultures, oil painting and watercolor painting have rich and complex traditions in style and subject matter. In the East, ink and color ink historically predominated the choice of media, with equally rich and complex traditions. The invention of photography had a major impact on painting. In the decades after the first photograph was produced in 1829, photographic processes improved and became more widely practiced, depriving painting of much of its historic purpose to provide an accurate record of the observable world. A series of art movements in the late 19th and early 20th centuries—notably Impressionism , Post-Impressionism , Fauvism , Expressionism , Cubism , and Dadaism —challenged the Renaissance view of the world. Eastern and African painting, however, continued a long history of stylization and did not undergo an equivalent transformation at the same time.[ citation needed ] Modern and Contemporary art has moved away from the historic value of craft and documentation in favour of concept . This has not deterred the majority of living painters from continuing to practice painting either as a whole or part of their work. The vitality and versatility of painting in the 21st century defy the previous "declarations" of its demise. In an epoch characterized by the idea of pluralism , there is no consensus as to a representative style of the age. Artists continue to make important works of art in a wide variety of styles and aesthetic temperaments —their merits are left to the public and the marketplace to judge. The Feminist art movement [12] began in the 1960s during the second wave of feminism. The movement sought to gain equal rights and equal opportunities for female artists internationally. Elements of painting[ edit ] Georges Seurat , Circus Sideshow ( French : Parade de cirque) (1887–88) Color and tone[ edit ] Color , made up of hue , saturation , and value , dispersed over a surface is the essence of painting, just as pitch and rhythm are the essence of music . Color is highly subjective, but has observable psychological effects, although these can differ from one culture to the next. Black is associated with mourning in the West, but in the East, white is. Some painters, theoreticians, writers, and scientists, including Goethe , [13] Kandinsky , [14] and Newton , [15] have written their own color theory . Moreover, the use of language is only an abstraction for a color equivalent. The word " red ", for example, can cover a wide range of variations from the pure red of the visible spectrum of light. There is not a formalized register of different colors in the way that there is agreement on different notes in music, such as F or C♯ . For a painter, color is not simply divided into basic (primary) and derived (complementary or mixed) colors (like red, blue, green, brown, etc.). Painters deal practically with pigments , [16] so " blue " for a painter can be any of the blues: phthalocyanine blue , Prussian blue , indigo , Cobalt blue , ultramarine , and so on. Psychological and symbolical meanings of color are not, strictly speaking, means of painting. Colors only add to the potential, derived context of meanings, and because of this, the perception of a painting is highly subjective. The analogy with music is quite clear—sound in music (like a C note) is analogous to "light" in painting, "shades" to dynamics , and "coloration" is to painting as the specific timbre of musical instruments is to music. These elements do not necessarily form a melody (in music) of themselves; rather, they can add different contexts to it. Non-traditional elements[ edit ] Modern artists have extended the practice of painting considerably to include, as one example, collage , which began with Cubism and is not painting in the strict sense. Some modern painters incorporate different materials such as metal, plastic, sand , cement , straw , leaves or wood for their texture. Examples of this are the works of Jean Dubuffet and Anselm Kiefer . There is a growing community of artists who use computers to "paint" color onto a digital "canvas" using programs such as Adobe Photoshop , Corel Painter , and many others. These images can be printed onto traditional canvas if required. Jean Metzinger , La danse (Bacchante) ( c. 1906), oil on canvas, 73 x 54 cm, Kröller-Müller Museum Jean Metzinger 's mosaic-like Divisionist technique had its parallel in literature; a characteristic of the alliance between Symbolist writers and Neo-Impressionist artists: I ask of divided brushwork not the objective rendering of light, but iridescences and certain aspects of color still foreign to painting. I make a kind of chromatic versification and for syllables, I use strokes which, variable in quantity, cannot differ in dimension without modifying the rhythm of a pictorial phraseology destined to translate the diverse emotions aroused by nature. (Jean Metzinger, c. 1907) [17] Piet Mondrian , Composition en rouge, jaune, bleu et noir (1921), Gemeentemuseum Den Haag Rhythm , for artists such as Piet Mondrian , [18] [19] is important in painting as it is in music. If one defines rhythm as "a pause incorporated into a sequence", then there can be rhythm in paintings. These pauses allow creative force to intervene and add new creations—form, melody, coloration. The distribution of form or any kind of information is of crucial importance in the given work of art, and it directly affects the aesthetic value of that work. This is because the aesthetic value is functionality dependent, i.e. the freedom (of movement) of perception is perceived as beauty. Free flow of energy, in art as well as in other forms of " techne ", directly contributes to the aesthetic value. [18] Music was important to the birth of abstract art since music is abstract by nature—it does not try to represent the exterior world, but expresses in an immediate way the inner feelings of the soul. Wassily Kandinsky often used musical terms to identify his works; he called his most spontaneous paintings "improvisations" and described more elaborate works as "compositions". Kandinsky theorized that "music is the ultimate teacher", [20] and subsequently embarked upon the first seven of his ten Compositions. Hearing tones and chords as he painted, Kandinsky theorized that (for example), yellow is the color of middle C on a brassy trumpet; black is the color of closure, and the end of things; and that combinations of colors produce vibrational frequencies, akin to chords played on a piano. In 1871 the young Kandinsky learned to play the piano and cello. [21] [22] Kandinsky's stage design for a performance of Mussorgsky 's Pictures at an Exhibition illustrates his "synaesthetic" concept of a universal correspondence of forms, colors and musical sounds. [23] Music defines much of modernist abstract painting. Jackson Pollock underscores that interest with his 1950 painting Autumn Rhythm (Number 30) . [24] Aesthetics and theory[ edit ] Main article: Theory of painting Female painter sitting on a campstool and painting a statue of Dionysus or Priapus onto a panel which is held by a boy. Fresco from Pompeii , 1st century Aesthetics is the study of art and beauty ; it was an important issue for 18th- and 19th-century philosophers such as Kant and Hegel . Classical philosophers like Plato and Aristotle also theorized about art and painting in particular. Plato disregarded painters (as well as sculptors) in his philosophical system; he maintained that painting cannot depict the truth —it is a copy of reality (a shadow of the world of ideas) and is nothing but a craft , similar to shoemaking or iron casting. [25] By the time of Leonardo, painting had become a closer representation of the truth than painting was in Ancient Greece . Leonardo da Vinci , on the contrary, said that " Italian : La Pittura è cosa mentale" ("English: painting is a thing of the mind"). [26] Kant distinguished between Beauty and the Sublime , in terms that clearly gave priority to the former.[ citation needed ] Although he did not refer to painting in particular, this concept was taken up by painters such as J.M.W. Turner and Caspar David Friedrich . Nino Pisano , Apelles or the Art of painting in detail (1334–1336); relief of the Giotto's Bell Tower in Florence , Italy Hegel recognized the failure of attaining a universal concept of beauty and, in his aesthetic essay, wrote that painting is one of the three "romantic" arts, along with Poetry and Music , for its symbolic , highly intellectual purpose. [27] [28] Painters who have written theoretical works on painting include Kandinsky and Paul Klee . [29] [30] In his essay, Kandinsky maintains that painting has a spiritual value, and he attaches primary colors to essential feelings or concepts, something that Goethe and other writers had already tried to do. Iconography is the study of the content of paintings, rather than their style. Erwin Panofsky and other art historians first seek to understand the things depicted, before looking at their meaning for the viewer at the time, and finally analyzing their wider cultural, religious, and social meaning. [31] In 1890, the Parisian painter Maurice Denis famously asserted: "Remember that a painting—before being a warhorse, a naked woman or some story or other—is essentially a flat surface covered with colors assembled in a certain order." [32] Thus, many 20th-century developments in painting, such as Cubism , were reflections on the means of painting rather than on the external world— nature —which had previously been its core subject. Recent contributions to thinking about painting have been offered by the painter and writer Julian Bell. In his book What is Painting?, Bell discusses the development, through history, of the notion that paintings can express feelings and ideas. [33] In Mirror of The World, Bell writes: A work of art seeks to hold your attention and keep it fixed: a history of art urges it onwards, bulldozing a highway through the homes of the imagination. [34] Painting media[ edit ] Different types of paint are usually identified by the medium that the pigment is suspended or embedded in, which determines the general working characteristics of the paint, such as viscosity , miscibility , solubility , drying time, etc. Hot wax or encaustic[ edit ] Encaustic icon from Saint Catherine's Monastery , Egypt (6th-century) Encaustic painting , also known as hot wax painting, involves using heated beeswax to which colored pigments are added. The liquid/paste is then applied to a surface—usually prepared wood, though canvas and other materials are often used. The simplest encaustic mixture can be made from adding pigments to beeswax, but there are several other recipes that can be used—some containing other types of waxes , damar resin , linseed oil , or other ingredients. Pure, powdered pigments can be purchased and used, though some mixtures use oil paints or other forms of pigment. Metal tools and special brushes can be used to shape the paint before it cools, or heated metal tools can be used to manipulate the wax once it has cooled onto the surface. Other materials can be encased or collaged into the surface, or layered, using the encaustic medium to adhere it to the surface. The technique was the normal one for ancient Greek and Roman panel paintings, and remained in use in the Eastern Orthodox icon tradition. John Martin , Manfred on the Jungfrau (1837), watercolor Watercolor is a painting method in which the paints are made of pigments suspended in a water-soluble vehicle. The traditional and most common support for watercolor paintings is paper; other supports include papyrus , bark papers, plastics, vellum or leather , fabric , wood and canvas . In East Asia, watercolor painting with inks is referred to as brush painting or scroll painting. In Chinese , Korean , and Japanese painting it has been the dominant medium, often in monochrome black or browns. India, Ethiopia and other countries also have long traditions. Finger-painting with watercolor paints originated in China . There are various types of watercolors used by artists. Some examples are pan watercolors, liquid watercolors, watercolor brush pens, and watercolor pencils . Watercolor pencils (water-soluble color pencils) may be used either wet or dry. Gouache[ edit ] Rudolf Reschreiter, Blick von der Höllentalangerhütte zum Höllentalgletscher und den Riffelwandspitzen, Gouache (1921) Gouache is a water-based paint consisting of pigment and other materials designed to be used in an opaque painting method. Gouache differs from watercolor in that the particles are larger, the ratio of pigment to water is much higher, and an additional, inert, white pigment such as chalk is also present. This makes gouache heavier and more opaque, with greater reflective qualities. Like all water media, it is diluted with water. [35] Gouache was a popular paint utilized by Egyptians [36] , Painters such as Francois Boucher used this medium. This paint is best applied with sable brushes. Ceramic Glaze Glazing is commonly known as a premelted liquid glass. This glaze can be dipped or brushed on. This glaze appears chalky and there is a vast difference between the beginning and finished result. To be activated glazed pottery must be placed in a kiln to be fired. This melts the Silica glass in the glaze and transforms it into a vibrant glossy version of itself. [37] [38] Ink[ edit ] Sesshū Tōyō , Landscapes of the Four Seasons (1486), ink and light color on paper Ink paintings are done with a liquid that contains pigments or dyes and is used to color a surface to produce an image, text , or design . Ink is used for drawing with a pen , brush , or quill . Ink can be a complex medium, composed of solvents , pigments, dyes, resins , lubricants , solubilizers, surfactants , particulate matter , fluorescers , and other materials. The components of inks serve many purposes; the ink's carrier, colorants, and other additives control flow and thickness of the ink and its appearance when dry. Jean de Court (attributed), painted Limoges enamel dish in detail (mid-16th century), Waddesdon Bequest , British Museum Enamels are made by painting a substrate, typically metal, with powdered glass; minerals called color oxides provide coloration. After firing at a temperature of 750–850 degrees Celsius (1380–1560 degrees Fahrenheit), the result is a fused lamination of glass and metal.  Unlike most painted techniques, the surface can be handled and wetted Enamels have traditionally been used for decoration of precious objects, [39] but have also been used for other purposes. Limoges enamel was the leading centre of Renaissance enamel painting, with small religious and mythological scenes in decorated surrounds, on plaques or objects such as salts or caskets.  In the 18th century, enamel painting enjoyed a vogue in Europe, especially as a medium for portrait miniatures . [40] In the late 20th century, the technique of porcelain enamel on metal has been used as a durable medium for outdoor murals. [41] Sandro Botticelli , The Birth of Venus , Tempera (1485–1486) Tempera , also known as egg tempera, is a permanent, fast-drying painting medium consisting of colored pigment mixed with a water-soluble binder medium (usually a glutinous material such as egg yolk or some other size ). Tempera also refers to the paintings done in this medium. Tempera paintings are very long-lasting, and examples from the first centuries CE still exist. Egg tempera was a primary method of painting until after 1500 when it was superseded by the invention of oil painting . A paint commonly called tempera (though it is not) consisting of pigment and glue size is commonly used and referred to by some manufacturers in America as poster paint . Fresco[ edit ] White Angel (fresco, c. 1235), Mileševa monastery, Serbia Fresco is any of several related mural painting types, done on plaster on walls or ceilings. The word fresco comes from the Italian word affresco [afˈfresːko], which derives from the Latin word for fresh. Frescoes were often made during the Renaissance and other early time periods. Buon fresco technique consists of painting in pigment mixed with water on a thin layer of wet, fresh lime mortar or plaster , for which the Italian word for plaster, intonaco , is used. A secco painting, in contrast, is done on dry plaster (secco is "dry" in Italian). The pigments require a binding medium, such as egg ( tempera ), glue or oil to attach the pigment to the wall. Oil[ edit ] Honoré Daumier , The Painter (1808–1879), oil on panel with visible brushstrokes Oil painting is the process of painting with pigments that are bound with a medium of drying oil , such as linseed oil , which was widely used in early modern Europe. Often the oil was boiled with a resin such as pine resin or even frankincense ; these were called 'varnishes' and were prized for their body and gloss. Oil paint eventually became the principal medium used for creating artworks as its advantages became widely known. The transition began with Early Netherlandish painting in northern Europe, and by the height of the Renaissance oil painting techniques had almost completely replaced tempera paints in the majority of Europe. Maurice Quentin de La Tour , Portrait of Louis XV of France (1748), pastel Pastel is a painting medium in the form of a stick, consisting of pure powdered pigment and a binder. [42] The pigments used in pastels are the same as those used to produce all colored art media, including oil paints ; the binder is of a neutral hue and low saturation . The color effect of pastels is closer to the natural dry pigments than that of any other process. [43] Because the surface of a pastel painting is fragile and easily smudged, its preservation requires protective measures such as framing under glass; it may also be sprayed with a fixative . Nonetheless, when made with permanent pigments and properly cared for, a pastel painting may endure unchanged for centuries. Pastels are not susceptible, as are paintings made with a fluid medium, to the cracking and discoloration that result from changes in the color, opacity, or dimensions of the medium as it dries. Acrylic[ edit ] Ray Burggraf , Jungle Arc (1998), acrylic paint on wood Acrylic paint is fast drying paint containing pigment suspension in acrylic polymer emulsion . Acrylic paints can be diluted with water but become water-resistant when dry. Depending on how much the paint is diluted (with water) or modified with acrylic gels, media, or pastes, the finished acrylic painting can resemble a watercolor or an oil painting , or have its own unique characteristics not attainable with other media. The main practical difference between most acrylics and oil paints is the inherent drying time. [44] Oils allow for more time to blend colors and apply even glazes over under-paintings. This slow drying aspect of oil can be seen as an advantage for certain techniques but may also impede the artist's ability to work quickly. Another difference is that watercolors must be painted onto a porous surface, primarily watercolor paper. Acrylic paints can be used on many different surfaces. [44] [45] Both acrylic and watercolor are easy to clean up with water. Acrylic paint should be cleaned with soap and water immediately following use. Watercolor paint can be cleaned with just water. [46] [47] [48] Between 1946 and 1949, Leonard Bocour and Sam Golden invented a solution acrylic paint under the brand Magna paint . These were mineral spirit -based paints. Water-based acrylic paints were subsequently sold as latex house paints. [49] In 1963, George Rowney (part of Daler-Rowney since 1983) was the first manufacturer to introduce artists' acrylic paints in Europe, under the brand name "Cryla". [50] Acrylics are the most common paints used in grattage , a surrealist technique that began to be used with the advent of this type of paint. Acrylics are used for this purpose because they easily scrape or peel from a surface. [51] Spray paint[ edit ] Aerosol paint (also called spray paint) [52] is a type of paint that comes in a sealed pressurized container and is released in a fine spray mist when depressing a valve button. A form of spray painting , aerosol paint leaves a smooth, evenly coated surface. Standard sized cans are portable, inexpensive and easy to store. Aerosol primer can be applied directly to bare metal and many plastics. Speed, portability and permanence also make aerosol paint a common graffiti medium. In the late 1970s, street graffiti writers' signatures and murals became more elaborate, and a unique style developed as a factor of the aerosol medium and the speed required for illicit work. Many now recognize graffiti and street art as a unique art form and specifically manufactured aerosol paints are made for the graffiti artist. A stencil protects a surface, except the specific shape to be painted. Stencils can be purchased as movable letters, ordered as professionally cut logos or hand-cut by artists. Water miscible oil paint[ edit ] Water miscible oil paints (also called "water soluble" or "water-mixable") is a modern variety of oil paint engineered to be thinned and cleaned up with water, [53] [54] rather than having to use chemicals such as turpentine . It can be mixed and applied using the same techniques as traditional oil-based paint, but while still wet it can be effectively removed from brushes, palettes, and rags with ordinary soap and water. Its water solubility comes from the use of an oil medium in which one end of the molecule has been altered to bind loosely to water molecules, as in a solution . Main article: Sandpainting Sandpainting is the art of pouring coloured sands, and powdered pigments from minerals or crystals, or pigments from other natural or synthetic sources onto a surface to make a fixed or unfixed sand painting. Main article: Digital painting Digital painting is a method of creating an art object (painting) digitally or a technique for making digital art on the computer. As a method of creating an art object, it adapts traditional painting medium such as acrylic paint , oils , ink , watercolor , etc. and applies the pigment to traditional carriers, such as woven canvas cloth, paper, polyester, etc. by means of software driving industrial robotic or office machinery (printers). As a technique, it refers to a computer graphics software program that uses a virtual canvas and virtual painting box of brushes, colors, and other supplies. The virtual box contains many instruments that do not exist outside the computer, and which give a digital artwork a different look and feel from an artwork that is made the traditional way. Furthermore, digital painting is not 'computer-generated' art as the computer does not automatically create images on the screen using some mathematical calculations. On the other hand, the artist uses his own painting technique to create a particular piece of work on the computer. [55] Other- Unruly Painting Methods.  Painting is not confined to one method over another. Artists such as Andy Warhol Explored the limits of painting. Oxidization [56] was utilized by Andy Warhol as he painted canvases sprawled on the ground. He then had his assistants and friends urinate on the still-wet [57] Paint to witness the visible changes that would occur. Menstrual Painting Other interesting painting mediums have helped women and menstruating individuals gain freedom and liberty over their bodies. Blood from menstrual periods has been used to paint images across the world for centuries [58] Sarah Maple, a contemporary artist, has used her menstrual blood to create portraits to help erase the taboo covering the topic of periods. Main article: Style (visual arts) Style is used in two senses: It can refer to the distinctive visual elements, techniques, and methods that typify an individual artist's work. It can also refer to the movement or school that an artist is associated with. This can stem from an actual group that the artist was consciously involved with or it can be a category in which art historians have placed the painter. The word 'style' in the latter sense has fallen out of favor in academic discussions about contemporary painting, though it continues to be used in popular contexts. Such movements or classifications include the following: Modernism[ edit ] Modernism describes both a set of cultural tendencies and an array of associated cultural movements , originally arising from wide-scale and far-reaching changes to Western society in the late 19th century and early 20th century. Modernism was a revolt against the conservative values of realism . [59] [60] The term encompasses the activities and output of those who felt the "traditional" forms of art, architecture, literature, religious faith, social organization, and daily life were becoming outdated in the new economic, social, and political conditions of an emerging fully industrialized world. A salient characteristic of modernism is self-consciousness. This often led to experiments with form, and work that draws attention to the processes and materials used (and to the further tendency of abstraction). [61] Claude Monet 's 1872 Impression, Sunrise inspired the name of the movement The first example of modernism in painting was impressionism , a school of painting that initially focused on work done, not in studios, but outdoors ( en plein air ). Impressionist paintings demonstrated that human beings do not see objects, but instead see light itself. The school gathered adherents despite internal divisions among its leading practitioners and became increasingly influential. Initially rejected from the most important commercial show of the time, the government-sponsored Paris Salon , the Impressionists organized yearly group exhibitions in commercial venues during the 1870s and 1880s, timing them to coincide with the official Salon. A significant event of 1863 was the Salon des Refusés , created by Emperor Napoleon III to display all of the paintings rejected by the Paris Salon. Abstract styles[ edit ] Abstract painting uses a visual language of form, colour and line to create a composition that may exist with a degree of independence from visual references in the world. [62] [63] Abstract expressionism was an American post- World War II art movement that combined the emotional intensity and self-denial of the German Expressionists with the anti-figurative aesthetic of the European abstract schools—such as Futurism , Bauhaus and Cubism , and the image of being rebellious, anarchic, highly idiosyncratic and, some feel, nihilistic. [64] Action painting , sometimes called gestural abstraction, is a style of painting in which paint is spontaneously dribbled, splashed or smeared onto the canvas, rather than being carefully applied. [65] The resulting work often emphasizes the physical act of painting itself as an essential aspect of the finished work or concern of its artist. The style was widespread from the 1940s until the early 1960s and is closely associated with abstract expressionism (some critics have used the terms "action painting" and "abstract expressionism" interchangeably). Other modernist styles include:
Toggle the table of contents Sculpture From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Artworks that are three-dimensional objects For other uses, see Sculpture (disambiguation) . "Sculpting" redirects here. For sculpting in computer graphics, see Digital sculpting . "Sculptor" redirects here. For other uses, see Sculptor (disambiguation) . ) Venus of Hohle Fels , Germany, oldest known sculpture of a human being, 42.000-40.000 BP Dying Gaul , or The Capitoline Gaul, [1] a Roman marble copy of a Hellenistic work of the late 3rd century BCE, Capitoline Museums , Rome Assyrian lamassu gate guardian from Khorsabad , c. 800–721 BCE Michelangelo 's Moses , ( c. 1513–1515), San Pietro in Vincoli , Rome , for the tomb of Pope Julius II Netsuke of tigress with two cubs, mid-19th-century Japan, ivory with shell inlay The Angel of the North by Antony Gormley , 1998 Sculpture is the branch of the visual arts that operates in three dimensions . Sculpture is the three-dimensional art work which is physically presented in the dimensions of height, width and depth. It is one of the plastic arts . Durable sculptural processes originally used carving (the removal of material) and modelling (the addition of material, as clay), in stone , metal , ceramics , wood and other materials but, since Modernism , there has been almost complete freedom of materials and process. A wide variety of materials may be worked by removal such as carving, assembled by welding or modelling, or moulded or cast . Sculpture in stone survives far better than works of art in perishable materials, and often represents the majority of the surviving works (other than pottery ) from ancient cultures, though conversely traditions of sculpture in wood may have vanished almost entirely. However, most ancient sculpture was brightly painted, and this has been lost. [2] Sculpture has been central in religious devotion in many cultures, and until recent centuries, large sculptures, too expensive for private individuals to create, were usually an expression of religion or politics. Those cultures whose sculptures have survived in quantities include the cultures of the ancient Mediterranean, India and China, as well as many in Central and South America and Africa. The Western tradition of sculpture began in ancient Greece , and Greece is widely seen as producing great masterpieces in the classical period. During the Middle Ages , Gothic sculpture represented the agonies and passions of the Christian faith. The revival of classical models in the Renaissance produced famous sculptures such as Michelangelo 's statue of David . Modernist sculpture moved away from traditional processes and the emphasis on the depiction of the human body, with the making of constructed sculpture , and the presentation of found objects as finished artworks. Open air Buddhist rock reliefs at the Longmen Grottoes , China A distinction between sculpture "in the round", free-standing sculpture such as statues , not attached except possibly at the base to any other surface, and the various types of relief , which are at least partly attached to a background surface. Relief is often classified by the degree of projection from the wall into low or bas-relief , high relief , and sometimes an intermediate mid-relief . Sunk-relief is a technique restricted to ancient Egypt . Relief is the usual sculptural medium for large figure groups and narrative subjects, which are difficult to accomplish in the round, and is the typical technique used both for architectural sculpture , which is attached to buildings, and for small-scale sculpture decorating other objects, as in much pottery , metalwork and jewellery . Relief sculpture may also decorate steles , upright slabs, usually of stone, often also containing inscriptions. Another basic distinction is between subtractive carving techniques, which remove material from an existing block or lump, for example of stone or wood, and modelling techniques which shape or build up the work from the material. Techniques such as casting , stamping and moulding use an intermediate matrix containing the design to produce the work; many of these allow the production of several copies. The term "sculpture" is often used mainly to describe large works, which are sometimes called monumental sculpture , meaning either or both of sculpture that is large, or that is attached to a building. But the term properly covers many types of small works in three dimensions using the same techniques, including coins and medals , hardstone carvings , a term for small carvings in stone that can take detailed work. The very large or "colossal" statue has had an enduring appeal since antiquity ; the largest on record at 182 m (597 ft) is the 2018 Indian Statue of Unity . Another grand form of portrait sculpture is the equestrian statue of a rider on horse, which has become rare in recent decades. The smallest forms of life-size portrait sculpture are the "head", showing just that, or the bust , a representation of a person from the chest up. Small forms of sculpture include the figurine , normally a statue that is no more than 18 inches (46 cm) tall, and for reliefs the plaquette , medal or coin. Modern and contemporary art have added a number of non-traditional forms of sculpture, including sound sculpture , light sculpture , environmental art , environmental sculpture , street art sculpture , kinetic sculpture (involving aspects of physical motion ), land art , and site-specific art . Sculpture is an important form of public art . A collection of sculpture in a garden setting can be called a sculpture garden . There is also a view that buildings are a type of sculpture, with Constantin Brâncuși describing architecture as "inhabited sculpture". [ citation needed ] Purposes and subjects[ edit ] Moai from Easter Island , where the concentration of resources on large sculpture may have had serious political effects Medal of John VIII Palaeologus , c. 1435, by Pisanello , the first portrait medal, a medium essentially made for collecting One of the most common purposes of sculpture is in some form of association with religion. Cult images are common in many cultures, though they are often not the colossal statues of deities which characterized ancient Greek art , like the Statue of Zeus at Olympia . The actual cult images in the innermost sanctuaries of Egyptian temples , of which none have survived, were evidently rather small, even in the largest temples. The same is often true in Hinduism , where the very simple and ancient form of the lingam is the most common. Buddhism brought the sculpture of religious figures to East Asia, where there seems to have been no earlier equivalent tradition, though again simple shapes like the bi and cong probably had religious significance. Small sculptures as personal possessions go back to the earliest prehistoric art, and the use of very large sculpture as public art , especially to impress the viewer with the power of a ruler, goes back at least to the Great Sphinx of some 4,500 years ago. In archaeology and art history the appearance, and sometimes disappearance, of large or monumental sculpture in a culture is regarded as of great significance, though tracing the emergence is often complicated by the presumed existence of sculpture in wood and other perishable materials of which no record remains; [3] The totem pole is an example of a tradition of monumental sculpture in wood that would leave no traces for archaeology. The ability to summon the resources to create monumental sculpture, by transporting usually very heavy materials and arranging for the payment of what are usually regarded as full-time sculptors, is considered a mark of a relatively advanced culture in terms of social organization. Recent unexpected discoveries of ancient Chinese Bronze Age figures at Sanxingdui , some more than twice human size, have disturbed many ideas held about early Chinese civilization, since only much smaller bronzes were previously known. [4] Some undoubtedly advanced cultures, such as the Indus Valley civilization , appear to have had no monumental sculpture at all, though producing very sophisticated figurines and seals. The Mississippian culture seems to have been progressing towards its use, with small stone figures, when it collapsed. Other cultures, such as ancient Egypt and the Easter Island culture , seem to have devoted enormous resources to very large-scale monumental sculpture from a very early stage. The collecting of sculpture, including that of earlier periods, goes back some 2,000 years in Greece, China and Mesoamerica, and many collections were available on semi-public display long before the modern museum was invented. From the 20th century the relatively restricted range of subjects found in large sculpture expanded greatly, with abstract subjects and the use or representation of any type of subject now common. Today much sculpture is made for intermittent display in galleries and museums, and the ability to transport and store the increasingly large works is a factor in their construction. Small decorative figurines , most often in ceramics, are as popular today (though strangely neglected by modern and Contemporary art ) as they were in the Rococo , or in ancient Greece when Tanagra figurines were a major industry, or in East Asian and Pre-Columbian art . Small sculpted fittings for furniture and other objects go well back into antiquity, as in the Nimrud ivories , Begram ivories and finds from the tomb of Tutankhamun . Portrait sculpture began in Egypt , where the Narmer Palette shows a ruler of the 32nd century BCE, and Mesopotamia , where we have 27 surviving statues of Gudea , who ruled Lagash c. 2144–2124 BCE. In ancient Greece and Rome, the erection of a portrait statue in a public place was almost the highest mark of honour, and the ambition of the elite, who might also be depicted on a coin. [5] In other cultures such as Egypt and the Near East public statues were almost exclusively the preserve of the ruler, with other wealthy people only being portrayed in their tombs. Rulers are typically the only people given portraits in Pre-Columbian cultures, beginning with the Olmec colossal heads of about 3,000 years ago. East Asian portrait sculpture was entirely religious, with leading clergy being commemorated with statues, especially the founders of monasteries, but not rulers, or ancestors. The Mediterranean tradition revived, initially only for tomb effigies and coins, in the Middle Ages, but expanded greatly in the Renaissance, which invented new forms such as the personal portrait medal . Animals are, with the human figure, the earliest subject for sculpture, and have always been popular, sometimes realistic, but often imaginary monsters; in China animals and monsters are almost the only traditional subjects for stone sculpture outside tombs and temples. The kingdom of plants is important only in jewellery and decorative reliefs, but these form almost all the large sculpture of Byzantine art and Islamic art , and are very important in most Eurasian traditions, where motifs such as the palmette and vine scroll have passed east and west for over two millennia. One form of sculpture found in many prehistoric cultures around the world is specially enlarged versions of ordinary tools, weapons or vessels created in impractical precious materials, for either some form of ceremonial use or display or as offerings. Jade or other types of greenstone were used in China, Olmec Mexico, and Neolithic Europe , and in early Mesopotamia large pottery shapes were produced in stone. Bronze was used in Europe and China for large axes and blades, like the Oxborough Dirk . Materials and techniques[ edit ] Sumerian male worshipper, alabaster with shell eyes, 2750−2600 BCE The materials used in sculpture are diverse, changing throughout history. The classic materials, with outstanding durability, are metal, especially bronze , stone and pottery, with wood, bone and antler less durable but cheaper options. Precious materials such as gold , silver , jade , and ivory are often used for small luxury works, and sometimes in larger ones, as in chryselephantine statues. More common and less expensive materials were used for sculpture for wider consumption, including hardwoods (such as oak , box/boxwood , and lime/linden ); terracotta and other ceramics , wax (a very common material for models for casting, and receiving the impressions of cylinder seals and engraved gems), and cast metals such as pewter and zinc (spelter). But a vast number of other materials have been used as part of sculptures, in ethnographic and ancient works as much as modern ones. Sculptures are often painted , but commonly lose their paint to time, or restorers. Many different painting techniques have been used in making sculpture, including tempera , oil painting , gilding , house paint, aerosol, enamel and sandblasting. [2] [6] Many sculptors seek new ways and materials to make art. One of Pablo Picasso 's most famous sculptures included bicycle parts. Alexander Calder and other modernists made spectacular use of painted steel . Since the 1960s, acrylics and other plastics have been used as well. Andy Goldsworthy makes his unusually ephemeral sculptures from almost entirely natural materials in natural settings. Some sculpture, such as ice sculpture , sand sculpture , and gas sculpture , is deliberately short-lived. Recent sculptors have used stained glass , tools, machine parts, hardware and consumer packaging to fashion their works. Sculptors sometimes use found objects , and Chinese scholar's rocks have been appreciated for many centuries. Stone[ edit ] Modern plaster recreation of the original painted appearance of a Late Archaic Greek marble figure from the Temple of Aphaea , based on analysis of pigment traces, [7] c. 500 BCE Stone sculpture is an ancient activity where pieces of rough natural stone are shaped by the controlled removal of stone . Owing to the permanence of the material, evidence can be found that even the earliest societies indulged in some form of stone work, though not all areas of the world have such abundance of good stone for carving as Egypt, Greece, India and most of Europe. Petroglyphs (also called rock engravings) are perhaps the earliest form: images created by removing part of a rock surface which remains in situ, by incising, pecking, carving, and abrading. Monumental sculpture covers large works, and architectural sculpture , which is attached to buildings. Hardstone carving is the carving for artistic purposes of semi-precious stones such as jade , agate , onyx , rock crystal , sard or carnelian , and a general term for an object made in this way. Alabaster or mineral gypsum is a soft mineral that is easy to carve for smaller works and still relatively durable. Engraved gems are small carved gems, including cameos , originally used as seal rings . The copying of an original statue in stone, which was very important for ancient Greek statues, which are nearly all known from copies, was traditionally achieved by " pointing ", along with more freehand methods. Pointing involved setting up a grid of string squares on a wooden frame surrounding the original, and then measuring the position on the grid and the distance between grid and statue of a series of individual points, and then using this information to carve into the block from which the copy is made. [8] Metal[ edit ] Ludwig Gies , cast iron plaquette , 8 x 9.8 cm, Refugees, 1915 Bronze and related copper alloys are the oldest and still the most popular metals for cast metal sculptures; a cast bronze sculpture is often called simply a "bronze". Common bronze alloys have the unusual and desirable property of expanding slightly just before they set, thus filling the finest details of a mould. Their strength and lack of brittleness (ductility) is an advantage when figures in action are to be created, especially when compared to various ceramic or stone materials (see marble sculpture for several examples). Gold is the softest and most precious metal, and very important in jewellery ; with silver it is soft enough to be worked with hammers and other tools as well as cast; repoussé and chasing are among the techniques used in gold and silversmithing . Casting is a group of manufacturing processes by which a liquid material (bronze, copper, glass, aluminum, iron) is (usually) poured into a mould, which contains a hollow cavity of the desired shape, and then allowed to solidify. The solid casting is then ejected or broken out to complete the process, [9] although a final stage of "cold work" may follow on the finished cast. Casting may be used to form hot liquid metals or various materials that cold set after mixing of components (such as epoxies , concrete , plaster and clay ). Casting is most often used for making complex shapes that would be otherwise difficult or uneconomical to make by other methods. The oldest surviving casting is a copper Mesopotamian frog from 3200 BCE. [10] Specific techniques include lost-wax casting , plaster mould casting, and sand casting . Welding is a process where different pieces of metal are fused together to create different shapes and designs. There are many different forms of welding, such as Oxy-fuel welding , Stick welding , MIG welding , and TIG welding . Oxy-fuel is probably the most common method of welding when it comes to creating steel sculptures because it is the easiest to use for shaping the steel as well as making clean and less noticeable joins of the steel. The key to Oxy-fuel welding is heating each piece of metal to be joined evenly until all are red and have a shine to them. Once that shine is on each piece, that shine will soon become a 'pool' where the metal is liquified and the welder must get the pools to join, fusing the metal. Once cooled off, the location where the pools joined are now one continuous piece of metal. Also used heavily in Oxy-fuel sculpture creation is forging. Forging is the process of heating metal to a certain point to soften it enough to be shaped into different forms. One very common example is heating the end of a steel rod and hitting the red heated tip with a hammer while on an anvil to form a point. In between hammer swings, the forger rotates the rod and gradually forms a sharpened point from the blunt end of a steel rod.
) Public performance in Jade Dragon Snow Mountain Open Air Theatre The Tang dynasty is sometimes known as "The Age of 1000 Entertainments". During this era, Ming Huang formed an acting school known as The Pear Garden to produce a form of drama that was primarily musical. That is why actors are commonly called "Children of the Pear Garden". During the dynasty of Empress Ling, shadow puppetry first emerged as a recognized form of theatre in China. There were two distinct forms of shadow puppetry, Pekingese (northern) and Cantonese (southern). The two styles were differentiated by the method of making the puppets and the positioning of the rods on the puppets , as opposed to the type of play performed by the puppets. Both styles generally performed plays depicting great adventure and fantasy, rarely was this very stylized form of theatre used for political propaganda. Japanese forms of Kabuki , Nō , and Kyōgen developed in the 17th century CE. [50] Cantonese shadow puppets were the larger of the two. They were built using thick leather which created more substantial shadows. Symbolic colour was also very prevalent; a black face represented honesty, a red one bravery. The rods used to control Cantonese puppets were attached perpendicular to the puppets' heads. Thus, they were not seen by the audience when the shadow was created. Pekingese puppets were more delicate and smaller. They were created out of thin, translucent leather (usually taken from the belly of a donkey). They were painted with vibrant paints, thus they cast a very colourful shadow. The thin rods which controlled their movements were attached to a leather collar at the neck of the puppet. The rods ran parallel to the bodies of the puppet and then turned at a ninety degree angle to connect to the neck. While these rods were visible when the shadow was cast, they laid outside the shadow of the puppet; thus they did not interfere with the appearance of the figure. The rods are attached at the necks to facilitate the use of multiple heads with one body. When the heads were not being used, they were stored in a muslin book or fabric-lined box. The heads were always removed at night. This was in keeping with the old superstition that if left intact, the puppets would come to life at night. Some puppeteers went so far as to store the heads in one book and the bodies in another, to further reduce the possibility of reanimating puppets. Shadow puppetry is said to have reached its highest point of artistic development in the eleventh century before becoming a tool of the government. In the Song dynasty , there were many popular plays involving acrobatics and music. These developed in the Yuan dynasty into a more sophisticated form known as zaju , with a four- or five-act structure. Yuan drama spread across China and diversified into numerous regional forms, one of the best known of which is Peking Opera which is still popular today. Xiangsheng is a certain traditional Chinese comedic performance in the forms of monologue or dialogue. Main articles: Theatre of Indonesia and Balinese theatre Rama and Shinta in Wayang Wong performance near Prambanan temple complex In Indonesia , theatre performances have become an important part of local culture, theatre performances in Indonesia have been developed for thousands of years. Most of Indonesia's oldest theatre forms are linked directly to local literary traditions (oral and written). The prominent puppet theatres — wayang golek (wooden rod-puppet play) of the Sundanese and wayang kulit (leather shadow-puppet play) of the Javanese and Balinese —draw much of their repertoire from indigenized versions of the Ramayana and Mahabharata . These tales also provide source material for the wayang wong (human theatre) of Java and Bali , which uses actors. Some wayang golek performances, however, also present Muslim stories, called menak. [51] [52] Wayang is an ancient form of storytelling that renowned for its elaborate puppet/human and complex musical styles. [53] The earliest evidence is from the late 1st millennium CE, in medieval-era texts and archeological sites. [54] The oldest known record that concerns wayang is from the 9th century. Around 840 AD an Old Javanese (Kawi) inscriptions called Jaha Inscriptions issued by Maharaja Sri Lokapala from Mataram Kingdom in Central Java mentions three sorts of performers: atapukan, aringgit, and abanol. Aringgit means Wayang puppet show, Atapukan means Mask dance show, and abanwal means joke art. Ringgit is described in an 11th-century Javanese poem as a leather shadow figure. Medieval Islamic traditions[ edit ] Theatre in the medieval Islamic world included puppet theatre (which included hand puppets, shadow plays and marionette productions) and live passion plays known as ta'ziyeh , where actors re-enact episodes from Muslim history . In particular, Shia Islamic plays revolved around the istishhād (martyrdom) of Ali 's sons Hasan ibn Ali and Husayn ibn Ali . Secular plays were known as akhraja, recorded in medieval adab literature, though they were less common than puppetry and ta'ziya theatre. [55] Early modern and modern theatre in the West[ edit ] Statues of Pantalone and Harlequin , two stock characters from the commedia dell'arte , in the Museo Teatrale alla Scala , Milan, Italy Theatre took on many alternative forms in the West between the 15th and 19th centuries, including commedia dell'arte from Italian theatre , and melodrama . The general trend was away from the poetic drama of the Greeks and the Renaissance and toward a more naturalistic prose style of dialogue, especially following the Industrial Revolution . [56] Theatre took a big pause during 1642 and 1660 in England because of the Puritan Interregnum. [57] The rising anti-theatrical sentiment among Puritans saw William Prynne write Histriomastix (1633), the most notorious attack on theatre prior to the ban. [57] Viewing theatre as sinful, the Puritans ordered the closure of London theatres in 1642 . [58] On 24 January 1643, the actors protested against the ban by writing a pamphlet titled The Actors remonstrance or complaint for the silencing of their profession, and banishment from their severall play-houses. [59] This stagnant period ended once Charles II came back to the throne in 1660 in the Restoration . Theatre (among other arts) exploded, with influence from French culture, since Charles had been exiled in France in the years previous to his reign. In 1660, two companies were licensed to perform, the Duke's Company and the King's Company . Performances were held in converted buildings, such as Lisle's Tennis Court . The first West End theatre , known as Theatre Royal in Covent Garden , London, was designed by Thomas Killigrew and built on the site of the present Theatre Royal, Drury Lane . [60] One of the big changes was the new theatre house. Instead of the type of the Elizabethan era, such as the Globe Theatre , round with no place for the actors to prepare for the next act and with no "theatre manners", the theatre house became transformed into a place of refinement, with a stage in front and stadium seating facing it. Since seating was no longer all the way around the stage, it became prioritized—some seats were obviously better than others. The king would have the best seat in the house: the very middle of the theatre, which got the widest view of the stage as well as the best way to see the point of view and vanishing point that the stage was constructed around. Philippe Jacques de Loutherbourg was one of the most influential set designers of the time because of his use of floor space and scenery. Because of the turmoil before this time, there was still some controversy about what should and should not be put on the stage. Jeremy Collier , a preacher, was one of the heads in this movement through his piece A Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage. The beliefs in this paper were mainly held by non-theatre goers and the remainder of the Puritans and very religious of the time. The main question was if seeing something immoral on stage affects behaviour in the lives of those who watch it, a controversy that is still playing out today. [61] The seventeenth century had also introduced women to the stage, which was considered inappropriate earlier. These women were regarded as celebrities (also a newer concept, thanks to ideas on individualism that arose in the wake of Renaissance Humanism ), but on the other hand, it was still very new and revolutionary that they were on the stage, and some said they were unladylike, and looked down on them. Charles II did not like young men playing the parts of young women, so he asked that women play their own parts. [62] Because women were allowed on the stage, playwrights had more leeway with plot twists, like women dressing as men, and having narrow escapes from morally sticky situations as forms of comedy. Billing for a British theatre in 1829 Comedies were full of the young and very much in vogue, with the storyline following their love lives: commonly a young roguish hero professing his love to the chaste and free minded heroine near the end of the play, much like Sheridan's The School for Scandal . Many of the comedies were fashioned after the French tradition, mainly Molière, again hailing back to the French influence brought back by the King and the Royals after their exile. Molière was one of the top comedic playwrights of the time, revolutionizing the way comedy was written and performed by combining Italian commedia dell'arte and neoclassical French comedy to create some of the longest lasting and most influential satiric comedies. [63] Tragedies were similarly victorious in their sense of righting political power, especially poignant because of the recent Restoration of the Crown. [64] They were also imitations of French tragedy, although the French had a larger distinction between comedy and tragedy, whereas the English fudged the lines occasionally and put some comedic parts in their tragedies. Common forms of non-comedic plays were sentimental comedies as well as something that would later be called tragédie bourgeoise, or domestic tragedy —that is, the tragedy of common life—were more popular in England because they appealed more to English sensibilities. [65] While theatre troupes were formerly often travelling, the idea of the national theatre gained support in the 18th century, inspired by Ludvig Holberg . The major promoter of the idea of the national theatre in Germany, and also of the Sturm und Drang poets, was Abel Seyler , the owner of the Hamburgische Entreprise and the Seyler Theatre Company . [66]
e Dance is an art form , often classified as a sport , consisting of sequences of body movements with aesthetic and often symbolic value, either improvised or purposefully selected. [nb 1] Dance can be categorized and described by its choreography , by its repertoire of movements or by its historical period or place of origin . [3] Dance is typically performed with musical accompaniment , and sometimes with the dancer simultaneously using a musical instrument themselves. An important distinction is to be drawn between theatrical and participatory dance, [4] although these two categories are not always completely separate; both may have special functions, whether social, ceremonial , competitive , erotic , martial , sacred or liturgical . Other forms of human movement are sometimes said to have a dance-like quality, including martial arts , gymnastics , cheerleading , figure skating , synchronized swimming , marching bands , and many other forms of athletics . Dance is not solely restricted to performance, as dance is used as a form of exercise and occasionally training for other sports and activities. Dance has become a sport for some, with dancing competitions found across the world exhibiting various different styles and standards. Dance has an aesthetic appeal to many people. [5] Theatrical and participatory dance Members of an American jazz dance company perform a formal group routine in a concert dance setting. Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Theatrical dance, also called performance or concert dance , is intended primarily as a spectacle, usually a performance upon a stage by virtuoso dancers. It often tells a story , perhaps using mime , costume and scenery , or it may interpret the musical accompaniment , which is often specially composed and performed in a theatre setting but it is not a requirement. Examples are Western ballet and modern dance , Classical Indian dance such as Bharatanatyam , and Chinese and Japanese song and dance dramas, such as the dragon dance . Most classical forms are centred upon dance alone, but performance dance may also appear in opera and other forms of musical theatre . Participatory dance, whether it be a folk dance , a social dance , a group dance such as a line , circle , chain or square dance , or a partner dance , such as in Western ballroom dancing , is undertaken primarily for a common purpose, such as social interaction or exercise , or building flexibility of participants rather than to serve any benefit to onlookers. Such dance seldom has any narrative. A group dance and a corps de ballet , a social partner dance and a pas de deux , differ profoundly. Even a solo dance or interpretive dance may be undertaken solely for the satisfaction of the dancer. Participatory dancers often all employ the same movements and steps but, for example, in the rave culture of electronic dance music , vast crowds may engage in free dance , uncoordinated with those around them. On the other hand, some cultures lay down strict rules as to the particular dances people may or must participate. History Main article: History of dance Mesolithic dancers at Bhimbetka Archaeological evidence for early dance includes 10,000-years-old paintings in Madhya Pradesh, India at the Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka , [6] and Egyptian tomb paintings depicting dancing figures, dated c. 3300 BC. It has been proposed that before the invention of written languages, dance was an important part of the oral and performance methods of passing stories down from one generation to the next. [7] The use of dance in ecstatic trance states and healing rituals (as observed today in many contemporary indigenous cultures) is thought to have been another early factor in the social development of dance. [8] Dancers and musicians on a Sasanian bowl, Iran References to dance can be found in very early recorded history; Greek dance ( choros ) is referred to by Plato , Aristotle , Plutarch and Lucian . [9] The Bible and Talmud refer to many events related to dance, and contain over 30 different dance terms. [10] In Chinese pottery as early as the Neolithic period, groups of people are depicted dancing in a line holding hands, [11] and the earliest Chinese word for "dance" is found written in the oracle bones . [12] Dance is described in the Lüshi Chunqiu . [13] [14] Primitive dance in ancient China was associated with sorcery and shamanic rituals. [15] Greek bronze statuette of a veiled and masked dancer, 3rd–2nd century BC, Alexandria, Egypt During the first millennium BCE in India, many texts were composed which attempted to codify aspects of daily life. Bharata Muni 's Natya Shastra (literally "the text of dramaturgy") is one early text. It mainly deals with drama, in which dance plays an important part in Indian culture. A strong continuous tradition of dance has since continued in India, through to modern times, where it continues to play a role in culture, ritual, and the Bollywood entertainment industry. Many other contemporary dance forms can likewise be traced back to historical , traditional , ceremonial , and ethnic dance.[ citation needed ] Music Two women dance at a pop music concert in Sofia, Bulgaria . Dance is generally, but not exclusively, performed with the accompaniment of music and may or may not be performed in time to such music. Some dance (such as tap dance or gumboot dance ) may provide its own audible accompaniment in place of (or in addition to) music. Many early forms of music and dance were created for each other and are frequently performed together. Notable examples of traditional dance-music couplings include the jig , waltz , tango , disco , and salsa . Some musical genres have a parallel dance form such as baroque music and baroque dance ; other varieties of dance and music may share nomenclature but developed separately, such as classical music and classical ballet . The choreography and music are meant to complement each other, to express a story told by the choreographer and dancers. [16] Rhythm Rhythm and dance are deeply linked in history and practice. The American dancer Ted Shawn wrote; "The conception of rhythm which underlies all studies of the dance is something about which we could talk forever, and still not finish." [17] A musical rhythm requires two main elements; first, a regularly-repeating pulse (also called the "beat" or "tactus") that establishes the tempo and, second, a pattern of accents and rests that establishes the character of the metre or basic rhythmic pattern . The basic pulse is roughly equal in duration to a simple step or gesture. A basic tango rhythm Dances generally have a characteristic tempo and rhythmic pattern. The tango, for example, is usually danced in 24 time at approximately 66 beats per minute. The basic slow step, called a "slow", lasts for one beat, so that a full "right–left" step is equal to one 24 measure. The basic forward and backward walk of the dance is so counted – "slow-slow" – while many additional figures are counted "slow – quick-quick". [18] Repetitive body movements often depend on alternating "strong" and "weak" muscular movements. [19] Given this alternation of left-right, of forward-backward and rise-fall, along with the bilateral symmetry of the human body, many dances and much music are in duple and quadruple meter . Since some such movements require more time in one phase than the other – such as the longer time required to lift a hammer than to strike – some dance rhythms fall into triple metre . [20] Occasionally, as in the folk dances of the Balkans , dance traditions depend heavily on more complex rhythms. Further, complex dances composed of a fixed sequence of steps always require phrases and melodies of a certain fixed length to accompany that sequence. Lululaund – The Dancing Girl (painting and silk cloth. A.L. Baldry 1901, before p. 107), The inscription reads; "Dancing is a form of rhythm/ Rhythm is a form of music/ Music is a form of thought/ And thought is a form of divinity." Musical accompaniment arose in the earliest dance, so that ancient Egyptians attributed the origin of the dance to the divine Athotus, who was said to have observed that music accompanying religious rituals caused participants to move rhythmically and to have brought these movements into proportional measure. The same idea, that dance arises from musical rhythm, was found in renaissance Europe, in the works of the dancer Guglielmo Ebreo da Pesaro , who speaks of dance as a physical movement that arises from and expresses inward, spiritual motion agreeing with the "measures and perfect concords of harmony" that fall upon the human ear, [19] while, earlier, Mechthild of Magdeburg , seizing upon dance as a symbol of the holy life foreshadowed in Jesus' saying "I have piped and ye have not danced", [21] writes; I can not dance unless thou leadest. If thou wouldst have me spring aloft, sing thou and I will spring, into love and from love to knowledge and from knowledge to ecstasy above all human sense [22] Thoinot Arbeau 's celebrated 16th-century dance-treatise Orchésographie, indeed, begins with definitions of over eighty distinct drum-rhythms. [23] Helen Moller The Waltz by Camille Claudel , 1905 cast As has been shown above, dance has been represented through the ages as having emerged as a response to music yet, as Lincoln Kirstein implied, it is at least as likely that primitive music arose from dance. Shawn concurs, stating that dance "was the first art of the human race, and the matrix out of which all other arts grew" and that even the " metre in our poetry today is a result of the accents necessitated by body movement, as the dancing and reciting was performed simultaneously" [17] – an assertion somewhat supported by the common use of the term "foot" to describe the fundamental rhythmic units of poetry. Scholes , not a dancer but a musician , offers support for this view, stating that the steady measures of music, of two, three or four beats to the bar, its equal and balanced phrases, regular cadences, contrasts and repetitions, may all be attributed to the "incalculable" influence of dance upon music. [24] Émile Jaques-Dalcroze , primarily a musician and teacher, relates how a study of the physical movements of pianists led him "to the discovery that musical sensations of a rhythmic nature call for the muscular and nervous response of the whole organism", to develop "a special training designed to regulate nervous reactions and effect a co-ordination of muscles and nerves" and ultimately to seek the connections between "the art of music and the art of dance", which he formulated into his system of eurhythmics . [25] He concluded that "musical rhythm is only the transposition into sound of movements and dynamisms spontaneously and involuntarily expressing emotion". [26] Hence, though doubtless, as Shawn asserts, "it is quite possible to develop the dance without music and... music is perfectly capable of standing on its own feet without any assistance from the dance", nevertheless the "two arts will always be related and the relationship can be profitable both to the dance and to music", [27] the precedence of one art over the other being a moot point. The common ballad measures of hymns and folk-songs takes their name from dance, as does the carol , originally a circle dance . Many purely musical pieces have been named " waltz " or " minuet ", for example, while many concert dances have been produced that are based upon abstract musical pieces, such as 2 and 3 Part Inventions , Adams Violin Concerto and Andantino . Similarly, poems are often structured and named after dances or musical works, while dance and music have both drawn their conception of "measure" or "metre" from poetry. Shawn quotes with approval the statement of Dalcroze that, while the art of musical rhythm consists in differentiating and combining time durations, pauses and accents "according to physiological law", that of "plastic rhythm" (i.e. dance) "is to designate movement in space, to interpret long time-values by slow movements and short ones by quick movements, regulate pauses by their divers successions and express sound accentuations in their multiple nuances by additions of bodily weight, by means of muscular innervations". Shawn nevertheless points out that the system of musical time is a "man-made, artificial thing.... a manufactured tool, whereas rhythm is something that has always existed and depends on man not at all", being "the continuous flowing time which our human minds cut up into convenient units", suggesting that music might be revivified by a return to the values and the time-perception of dancing. [28] The early-20th-century American dancer Helen Moller stated that "it is rhythm and form more than harmony and color which, from the beginning, has bound music, poetry and dancing together in a union that is indissoluble." [29] Approaches Tang dynasty female dancers Theatrical Concert dance, like opera , generally depends for its large-scale form upon a narrative dramatic structure . The movements and gestures of the choreography are primarily intended to mime the personality and aims of the characters and their part in the plot. [30] Such theatrical requirements tend towards longer, freer movements than those usual in non-narrative dance styles. On the other hand, the ballet blanc , developed in the 19th century, allows interludes of rhythmic dance that developed into entirely "plotless" ballets in the 20th century [31] and that allowed fast, rhythmic dance-steps such as those of the petit allegro. A well-known example is The Cygnets' Dance in act two of Swan Lake . The ballet developed out of courtly dramatic productions of 16th- and 17th-century France and Italy and for some time dancers performed dances developed from those familiar from the musical suite, [32] all of which were defined by definite rhythms closely identified with each dance. These appeared as character dances in the era of romantic nationalism . Ballet reached widespread vogue in the romantic era, accompanied by a larger orchestra and grander musical conceptions that did not lend themselves easily to rhythmic clarity and by dance that emphasised dramatic mime. A broader concept of rhythm was needed, that which Rudolf Laban terms the "rhythm and shape" of movement that communicates character, emotion and intention, [33] while only certain scenes required the exact synchronisation of step and music essential to other dance styles, so that, to Laban, modern Europeans seemed totally unable to grasp the meaning of "primitive rhythmic movements", [34] a situation that began to change in the 20th century with such productions as Igor Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring with its new rhythmic language evoking primal feelings of a primitive past. [35] Indian classical dance styles, like ballet, are often in dramatic form, so that there is a similar complementarity between narrative expression and "pure" dance. In this case, the two are separately defined, though not always separately performed. The rhythmic elements, which are abstract and technical, are known as nritta. Both this and expressive dance (nritya), though, are closely tied to the rhythmic system ( tala ). Teachers have adapted the spoken rhythmic mnemonic system called bol to the needs of dancers. Japanese classical dance-theatre styles such as Kabuki and Noh , like Indian dance-drama, distinguish between narrative and abstract dance productions. The three main categories of kabuki are jidaimono (historical), sewamono (domestic) and shosagoto (dance pieces). [36] Somewhat similarly, Noh distinguishes between Geki Noh, based around the advancement of plot and the narration of action, and Furyū Noh, dance pieces involving acrobatics, stage properties, multiple characters and elaborate stage action. [37] Participatory and social A contra dance , a form of participatory social folk dance with mixed European roots Social dances , those intended for participation rather than for an audience, may include various forms of mime and narrative, but are typically set much more closely to the rhythmic pattern of music, so that terms like waltz and polka refer as much to musical pieces as to the dance itself. The rhythm of the dancers' feet may even form an essential part of the music, as in tap dance . African dance, for example, is rooted in fixed basic steps, but may also allow a high degree of rhythmic interpretation: the feet or the trunk mark the basic pulse while cross-rhythms are picked up by shoulders, knees, or head, with the best dancers simultaneously giving plastic expression to all the elements of the polyrhythmic pattern. [38] Cultural traditions
Toggle the table of contents Photography This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 25 March 2024. Art and practice of creating images by recording light For other uses, see Photography (disambiguation) . Photographers at the Chicago Old Town Art Fair in 1968 Photography is the art , application, and practice of creating images by recording light , either electronically by means of an image sensor , or chemically by means of a light-sensitive material such as photographic film . It is employed in many fields of science, manufacturing (e.g., photolithography ), and business, as well as its more direct uses for art, film and video production , recreational purposes, hobby, and mass communication . [1] Typically, a lens is used to focus the light reflected or emitted from objects into a real image on the light-sensitive surface inside a camera during a timed exposure . With an electronic image sensor, this produces an electrical charge at each pixel , which is electronically processed and stored in a digital image file for subsequent display or processing. The result with photographic emulsion is an invisible latent image , which is later chemically "developed" into a visible image, either negative or positive , depending on the purpose of the photographic material and the method of processing . A negative image on film is traditionally used to photographically create a positive image on a paper base, known as a print , either by using an enlarger or by contact printing . Etymology[ edit ] The word "photography" was created from the Greek roots φωτός (phōtós), genitive of φῶς (phōs), "light" [2] and γραφή (graphé) "representation by means of lines" or "drawing", [3] together meaning "drawing with light". [4] Several people may have coined the same new term from these roots independently. Hércules Florence , a French painter and inventor living in Campinas, Brazil , used the French form of the word, photographie, in private notes which a Brazilian historian believes were written in 1834. [5] This claim is widely reported but is not yet largely recognized internationally. The first use of the word by Florence became widely known after the research of Boris Kossoy in 1980. [6] The German newspaper Vossische Zeitung of 25 February 1839 contained an article entitled Photographie, discussing several priority claims – especially Henry Fox Talbot 's – regarding Daguerre's claim of invention. [7] The article is the earliest known occurrence of the word in public print. [8] It was signed "J.M.", believed to have been Berlin astronomer Johann von Maedler . [9] The astronomer John Herschel is also credited with coining the word, independent of Talbot, in 1839. [10] The inventors Nicéphore Niépce , Talbot, and Louis Daguerre seem not to have known or used the word "photography", but referred to their processes as "Heliography" (Niépce), "Photogenic Drawing"/"Talbotype"/"Calotype" (Talbot), and "Daguerreotype" (Daguerre). [9] Precursor technologies[ edit ] A camera obscura used for drawing Photography is the result of combining several technical discoveries, relating to seeing an image and capturing the image. The discovery of the camera obscura ("dark chamber" in Latin ) that provides an image of a scene dates back to ancient China . Greek mathematicians Aristotle and Euclid independently described a camera obscura in the 5th and 4th centuries BCE. [11] [12] In the 6th century CE, Byzantine mathematician Anthemius of Tralles used a type of camera obscura in his experiments. [13] The Arab physicist Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) (965–1040) also invented a camera obscura as well as the first true pinhole camera . [12] [14] [15] The invention of the camera has been traced back to the work of Ibn al-Haytham. [16] While the effects of a single light passing through a pinhole had been described earlier, [16] Ibn al-Haytham gave the first correct analysis of the camera obscura, [17] including the first geometrical and quantitative descriptions of the phenomenon, [18] and was the first to use a screen in a dark room so that an image from one side of a hole in the surface could be projected onto a screen on the other side. [19] He also first understood the relationship between the focal point and the pinhole, [20] and performed early experiments with afterimages , laying the foundations for the invention of photography in the 19th century. [15] Leonardo da Vinci mentions natural camerae obscurae that are formed by dark caves on the edge of a sunlit valley. A hole in the cave wall will act as a pinhole camera and project a laterally reversed, upside down image on a piece of paper. Renaissance painters used the camera obscura which, in fact, gives the optical rendering in color that dominates Western Art. It is a box with a small hole in one side, which allows specific light rays to enter, projecting an inverted image onto a viewing screen or paper. The birth of photography was then concerned with inventing means to capture and keep the image produced by the camera obscura. Albertus Magnus (1193–1280) discovered silver nitrate , [21] and Georg Fabricius (1516–1571) discovered silver chloride , [22] and the techniques described in Ibn al-Haytham 's Book of Optics are capable of producing primitive photographs using medieval materials.[ citation needed ] Daniele Barbaro described a diaphragm in 1566. [23] Wilhelm Homberg described how light darkened some chemicals (photochemical effect) in 1694. [24] The fiction book Giphantie , published in 1760, by French author Tiphaigne de la Roche , described what can be interpreted as photography. [23] In June 1802, British inventor Thomas Wedgwood made the first known attempt to capture the image in a camera obscura by means of a light-sensitive substance. [25] He used paper or white leather treated with silver nitrate . Although he succeeded in capturing the shadows of objects placed on the surface in direct sunlight, and even made shadow copies of paintings on glass, it was reported in 1802 that "the images formed by means of a camera obscura have been found too faint to produce, in any moderate time, an effect upon the nitrate of silver." The shadow images eventually darkened all over. [26] Invention[ edit ] Earliest known surviving heliographic engraving, 1825, printed from a metal plate made by Nicéphore Niépce . [27] The plate was exposed under an ordinary engraving and copied it by photographic means. This was a step towards the first permanent photograph taken with a camera. View from the Window at Le Gras , 1826, the earliest surviving camera photograph. Original plate (left) and colorized reoriented enhancement (right). View of the Predikherenlei en Predikherenbrug  in Ghent , October 1839, collection STAM – Ghent City Museum The first permanent photoetching was an image produced in 1822 by the French inventor Nicéphore Niépce , but it was destroyed in a later attempt to make prints from it. [27] Niépce was successful again in 1825. In 1826 he made the View from the Window at Le Gras , the earliest surviving photograph from nature (i.e., of the image of a real-world scene, as formed in a camera obscura by a lens ). [28] View of the Boulevard du Temple , a daguerreotype made by Louis Daguerre in 1838, is generally accepted as the earliest photograph to include people. It is a view of a busy street, but because the exposure lasted for several minutes the moving traffic left no trace. Only the two men near the bottom left corner, one of them apparently having his boots polished by the other, remained in one place long enough to be visible. Because Niépce's camera photographs required an extremely long exposure (at least eight hours and probably several days), he sought to greatly improve his bitumen process or replace it with one that was more practical. In partnership with Louis Daguerre , he worked out post-exposure processing methods that produced visually superior results and replaced the bitumen with a more light-sensitive resin, but hours of exposure in the camera were still required. With an eye to eventual commercial exploitation, the partners opted for total secrecy. Niépce died in 1833 and Daguerre then redirected the experiments toward the light-sensitive silver halides , which Niépce had abandoned many years earlier because of his inability to make the images he captured with them light-fast and permanent. Daguerre's efforts culminated in what would later be named the daguerreotype process. The essential elements—a silver-plated surface sensitized by iodine vapor, developed by mercury vapor, and "fixed" with hot saturated salt water—were in place in 1837. The required exposure time was measured in minutes instead of hours. Daguerre took the earliest confirmed photograph of a person in 1838 while capturing a view of a Paris street: unlike the other pedestrian and horse-drawn traffic on the busy boulevard, which appears deserted, one man having his boots polished stood sufficiently still throughout the several-minutes-long exposure to be visible. The existence of Daguerre's process was publicly announced, without details, on 7 January 1839. The news created an international sensation. France soon agreed to pay Daguerre a pension in exchange for the right to present his invention to the world as the gift of France, which occurred when complete working instructions were unveiled on 19 August 1839. In that same year, American photographer Robert Cornelius is credited with taking the earliest surviving photographic self-portrait. A latticed window in Lacock Abbey , England , photographed by William Fox Talbot in 1835. Shown here in positive form, this may be the oldest extant photographic negative made in a camera. In Brazil, Hercules Florence had apparently started working out a silver-salt-based paper process in 1832, later naming it Photographie. Meanwhile, a British inventor, William Fox Talbot , had succeeded in making crude but reasonably light-fast silver images on paper as early as 1834 but had kept his work secret. After reading about Daguerre's invention in January 1839, Talbot published his hitherto secret method and set about improving on it. At first, like other pre-daguerreotype processes, Talbot's paper-based photography typically required hours-long exposures in the camera, but in 1840 he created the calotype process, which used the chemical development of a latent image to greatly reduce the exposure needed and compete with the daguerreotype. In both its original and calotype forms, Talbot's process, unlike Daguerre's, created a translucent negative which could be used to print multiple positive copies; this is the basis of most modern chemical photography up to the present day, as daguerreotypes could only be replicated by rephotographing them with a camera. [29] Talbot's famous tiny paper negative of the Oriel window in Lacock Abbey , one of a number of camera photographs he made in the summer of 1835, may be the oldest camera negative in existence. [30] [31] In France, Hippolyte Bayard invented his own process for producing direct positive paper prints and claimed to have invented photography earlier than Daguerre or Talbot. [32] British chemist John Herschel made many contributions to the new field. He invented the cyanotype process, later familiar as the "blueprint". He was the first to use the terms "photography", "negative" and "positive". He had discovered in 1819 that sodium thiosulphate was a solvent of silver halides, and in 1839 he informed Talbot (and, indirectly, Daguerre) that it could be used to "fix" silver-halide-based photographs and make them completely light-fast. He made the first glass negative in late 1839. Wilson Chinn , a branded slave from Louisiana—per The New York Times , "one of the earliest and most dramatic examples of how the newborn medium of photography could change the course of history." [33] Advertisement for Campbell's Photograph Gallery from The Macon City Directory, c. 1877 In the March 1851 issue of The Chemist, Frederick Scott Archer published his wet plate collodion process . It became the most widely used photographic medium until the gelatin dry plate, introduced in the 1870s, eventually replaced it. There are three subsets to the collodion process; the Ambrotype (a positive image on glass), the Ferrotype or Tintype (a positive image on metal) and the glass negative, which was used to make positive prints on albumen or salted paper. Many advances in photographic glass plates and printing were made during the rest of the 19th century. In 1891, Gabriel Lippmann introduced a process for making natural-color photographs based on the optical phenomenon of the interference of light waves. His scientifically elegant and important but ultimately impractical invention earned him the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1908. Glass plates were the medium for most original camera photography from the late 1850s until the general introduction of flexible plastic films during the 1890s. Although the convenience of the film greatly popularized amateur photography, early films were somewhat more expensive and of markedly lower optical quality than their glass plate equivalents, and until the late 1910s they were not available in the large formats preferred by most professional photographers, so the new medium did not immediately or completely replace the old. Because of the superior dimensional stability of glass, the use of plates for some scientific applications, such as astrophotography , continued into the 1990s, and in the niche field of laser holography , it has persisted into the 21st century. Main article: Photographic film Undeveloped Arista black-and-white film, ISO 125/22° Hurter and Driffield began pioneering work on the light sensitivity of photographic emulsions in 1876. Their work enabled the first quantitative measure of film speed to be devised. The first flexible photographic roll film was marketed by George Eastman , founder of Kodak in 1885, but this original "film" was actually a coating on a paper base. As part of the processing, the image-bearing layer was stripped from the paper and transferred to a hardened gelatin support. The first transparent plastic roll film followed in 1889. It was made from highly flammable nitrocellulose known as nitrate film. Although cellulose acetate or " safety film " had been introduced by Kodak in 1908, [34] at first it found only a few special applications as an alternative to the hazardous nitrate film, which had the advantages of being considerably tougher, slightly more transparent, and cheaper. The changeover was not completed for X-ray films until 1933, and although safety film was always used for 16 mm and 8 mm home movies, nitrate film remained standard for theatrical 35 mm motion pictures until it was finally discontinued in 1951. Films remained the dominant form of photography until the early 21st century when advances in digital photography drew consumers to digital formats. [35] Although modern photography is dominated by digital users, film continues to be used by enthusiasts and professional photographers. The distinctive "look" of film based photographs compared to digital images is likely due to a combination of factors, including (1) differences in spectral and tonal sensitivity (S-shaped density-to-exposure (H&D curve) with film vs. linear response curve for digital CCD sensors), [36] (2) resolution, and (3) continuity of tone. [37] A photographic darkroom with safelight Originally, all photography was monochrome , or black-and-white . Even after color film was readily available, black-and-white photography continued to dominate for decades, due to its lower cost, chemical stability, and its "classic" photographic look. The tones and contrast between light and dark areas define black-and-white photography. [38] Monochromatic pictures are not necessarily composed of pure blacks, whites, and intermediate shades of gray but can involve shades of one particular hue depending on the process. The cyanotype process, for example, produces an image composed of blue tones. The albumen print process, publicly revealed in 1847, produces brownish tones. Many photographers continue to produce some monochrome images, sometimes because of the established archival permanence of well-processed silver-halide-based materials. Some full-color digital images are processed using a variety of techniques to create black-and-white results, and some manufacturers produce digital cameras that exclusively shoot monochrome. Monochrome printing or electronic display can be used to salvage certain photographs taken in color which are unsatisfactory in their original form; sometimes when presented as black-and-white or single-color-toned images they are found to be more effective. Although color photography has long predominated, monochrome images are still produced, mostly for artistic reasons. Almost all digital cameras have an option to shoot in monochrome, and almost all image editing software can combine or selectively discard RGB color channels to produce a monochrome image from one shot in color. Main article: Color photography The first color photograph made by the three-color method suggested by James Clerk Maxwell in 1855, taken in 1861 by Thomas Sutton . The subject is a colored, tartan patterned ribbon. Color photography was explored beginning in the 1840s. Early experiments in color required extremely long exposures (hours or days for camera images) and could not "fix" the photograph to prevent the color from quickly fading when exposed to white light. The first permanent color photograph was taken in 1861 using the three-color-separation principle first published by Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell in 1855. [39] [40] The foundation of virtually all practical color processes, Maxwell's idea was to take three separate black-and-white photographs through red, green and blue filters . [39] [40] This provides the photographer with the three basic channels required to recreate a color image. Transparent prints of the images could be projected through similar color filters and superimposed on the projection screen, an additive method of color reproduction. A color print on paper could be produced by superimposing carbon prints of the three images made in their complementary colors , a subtractive method of color reproduction pioneered by Louis Ducos du Hauron in the late 1860s. Color photography was possible long before Kodachrome , as this 1903 portrait by Sarah Angelina Acland demonstrates, but in its earliest years, the need for special equipment, long exposures, and complicated printing processes made it extremely rare. Russian photographer Sergei Mikhailovich Prokudin-Gorskii made extensive use of this color separation technique, employing a special camera which successively exposed the three color-filtered images on different parts of an oblong plate . Because his exposures were not simultaneous, unsteady subjects exhibited color "fringes" or, if rapidly moving through the scene, appeared as brightly colored ghosts in the resulting projected or printed images. Implementation of color photography was hindered by the limited sensitivity of early photographic materials, which were mostly sensitive to blue, only slightly sensitive to green, and virtually insensitive to red. The discovery of dye sensitization by photochemist Hermann Vogel in 1873 suddenly made it possible to add sensitivity to green, yellow and even red. Improved color sensitizers and ongoing improvements in the overall sensitivity of emulsions steadily reduced the once-prohibitive long exposure times required for color, bringing it ever closer to commercial viability. Autochrome , the first commercially successful color process, was introduced by the Lumière brothers in 1907. Autochrome plates incorporated a mosaic color filter layer made of dyed grains of potato starch , which allowed the three color components to be recorded as adjacent microscopic image fragments. After an Autochrome plate was reversal processed to produce a positive transparency , the starch grains served to illuminate each fragment with the correct color and the tiny colored points blended together in the eye, synthesizing the color of the subject by the additive method . Autochrome plates were one of several varieties of additive color screen plates and films marketed between the 1890s and the 1950s. Kodachrome , the first modern "integral tripack" (or "monopack") color film, was introduced by Kodak in 1935. It captured the three color components in a multi-layer emulsion . One layer was sensitized to record the red-dominated part of the spectrum , another layer recorded only the green part and a third recorded only the blue. Without special film processing , the result would simply be three superimposed black-and-white images, but complementary cyan, magenta, and yellow dye images were created in those layers by adding color couplers during a complex processing procedure. Agfa's similarly structured Agfacolor Neu was introduced in 1936. Unlike Kodachrome, the color couplers in Agfacolor Neu were incorporated into the emulsion layers during manufacture, which greatly simplified the processing. Currently, available color films still employ a multi-layer emulsion and the same principles, most closely resembling Agfa's product. Instant color film , used in a special camera which yielded a unique finished color print only a minute or two after the exposure, was introduced by Polaroid in 1963. Color photography may form images as positive transparencies, which can be used in a slide projector , or as color negatives intended for use in creating positive color enlargements on specially coated paper. The latter is now the most common form of film (non-digital) color photography owing to the introduction of automated photo printing equipment. After a transition period centered around 1995–2005, color film was relegated to a niche market by inexpensive multi-megapixel digital cameras. Film continues to be the preference of some photographers because of its distinctive "look". See also: Digital camera Kodak DCS 100, based on a Nikon F3 body with Digital Storage Unit In 1981, Sony unveiled the first consumer camera to use a charge-coupled device for imaging, eliminating the need for film: the Sony Mavica . While the Mavica saved images to disk, the images were displayed on television, and the camera was not fully digital. The first digital camera to both record and save images in a digital format was the Fujix DS-1P created by Fujfilm in 1988. [41] In 1991, Kodak unveiled the DCS 100 , the first commercially available digital single-lens reflex camera. Although its high cost precluded uses other than photojournalism and professional photography, commercial digital photography was born. Digital imaging uses an electronic image sensor to record the image as a set of electronic data rather than as chemical changes on film. [42] An important difference between digital and chemical photography is that chemical photography resists photo manipulation because it involves film and photographic paper , while digital imaging is a highly manipulative medium. This difference allows for a degree of image post-processing that is comparatively difficult in film-based photography and permits different communicative potentials and applications. Photography on a smartphone Digital photography dominates the 21st century. More than 99% of photographs taken around the world are through digital cameras, increasingly through smartphones. Techniques[ edit ] Angles such as vertical, horizontal, or as pictured here diagonal are considered important photographic techniques. A large variety of photographic techniques and media are used in the process of capturing images for photography. These include the camera; dualphotography; full-spectrum, ultraviolet and infrared media; light field photography; and other imaging techniques. Main article: Camera The camera is the image-forming device, and a photographic plate , photographic film or a silicon electronic image sensor is the capture medium. The respective recording medium can be the plate or film itself, or a digital magnetic or electronic memory. [43] Photographers control the camera and lens to "expose" the light recording material to the required amount of light to form a " latent image " (on plate or film) or RAW file (in digital cameras) which, after appropriate processing, is converted to a usable image. Digital cameras use an electronic image sensor based on light-sensitive electronics such as charge-coupled device (CCD) or complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) technology. The resulting digital image is stored electronically, but can be reproduced on a paper. The camera (or ' camera obscura ') is a dark room or chamber from which, as far as possible, all light is excluded except the light that forms the image. It was discovered and used in the 16th century by painters. The subject being photographed, however, must be illuminated. Cameras can range from small to very large, a whole room that is kept dark while the object to be photographed is in another room where it is properly illuminated. This was common for reproduction photography of flat copy when large film negatives were used (see Process camera ). As soon as photographic materials became "fast" (sensitive) enough for taking candid or surreptitious pictures, small "detective" cameras were made, some actually disguised as a book or handbag or pocket watch (the Ticka camera) or even worn hidden behind an Ascot necktie with a tie pin that was really the lens. The movie camera is a type of photographic camera that takes a rapid sequence of photographs on recording medium. In contrast to a still camera, which captures a single snapshot at a time, the movie camera takes a series of images, each called a "frame". This is accomplished through an intermittent mechanism. The frames are later played back in a movie projector at a specific speed, called the "frame rate" (number of frames per second). While viewing, a person's eyes and brain merge the separate pictures to create the illusion of motion. [44] Main article: Stereoscopy Photographs, both monochrome and color, can be captured and displayed through two side-by-side images that emulate human stereoscopic vision. Stereoscopic photography was the first that captured figures in motion. [45] While known colloquially as "3-D" photography, the more accurate term is stereoscopy. Such cameras have long been realized by using film and more recently in digital electronic methods (including cell phone cameras). Main article: Dualphotography An example of a dualphoto using a smartphone based app Dualphotography consists of photographing a scene from both sides of a photographic device at once (e.g. camera for back-to-back dualphotography, or two networked cameras for portal-plane dualphotography). The dualphoto apparatus can be used to simultaneously capture both the subject and the photographer, or both sides of a geographical place at once, thus adding a supplementary narrative layer to that of a single image. [46] Full-spectrum, ultraviolet and infrared[ edit ] This image of the rings of Saturn is an example of the application of ultraviolet photography in astronomy . Ultraviolet and infrared films have been available for many decades and employed in a variety of photographic avenues since the 1960s. New technological trends in digital photography have opened a new direction in full spectrum photography , where careful filtering choices across the ultraviolet, visible and infrared lead to new artistic visions. Modified digital cameras can detect some ultraviolet, all of the visible and much of the near infrared spectrum, as most digital imaging sensors are sensitive from about 350 nm to 1000 nm. An off-the-shelf digital camera contains an infrared hot mirror filter that blocks most of the infrared and a bit of the ultraviolet that would otherwise be detected by the sensor, narrowing the accepted range from about 400 nm to 700 nm. [47] Replacing a hot mirror or infrared blocking filter with an infrared pass or a wide spectrally transmitting filter allows the camera to detect the wider spectrum light at greater sensitivity. Without the hot-mirror, the red, green and blue (or cyan, yellow and magenta) colored micro-filters placed over the sensor elements pass varying amounts of ultraviolet (blue window) and infrared (primarily red and somewhat lesser the green and blue micro-filters). Layering[ edit ] Layering is a photographic composition technique that manipulates the foreground, subject or middle-ground, and background layers in a way that they all work together to tell a story through the image. [48] Layers may be incorporated by altering the focal length, distorting the perspective by positioning the camera in a certain spot. [49] People, movement, light and a variety of objects can be used in layering. [50] See also: Light-field camera Digital methods of image capture and display processing have enabled the new technology of "light field photography" (also known as synthetic aperture photography). This process allows focusing at various depths of field to be selected after the photograph has been captured. [51] As explained by Michael Faraday in 1846, the " light field " is understood as 5-dimensional, with each point in 3-D space having attributes of two more angles that define the direction of each ray passing through that point. These additional vector attributes can be captured optically through the use of microlenses at each pixel point within the 2-dimensional image sensor. Every pixel of the final image is actually a selection from each sub-array located under each microlens, as identified by a post-image capture focus algorithm. Devices other than cameras can be used to record images. Trichome of Arabidopsis thaliana seen via scanning electron microscope . Note that image has been edited by adding colors to clarify structure or to add an aesthetic effect. Heiti Paves from Tallinn University of Technology . Other[ edit ] Besides the camera, other methods of forming images with light are available. For instance, a photocopy or xerography machine forms permanent images but uses the transfer of static electrical charges rather than photographic medium, hence the term electrophotography . Photograms are images produced by the shadows of objects cast on the photographic paper, without the use of a camera. Objects can also be placed directly on the glass of an image scanner to produce digital pictures. Amateur[ edit ] Amateur photographers take photos for personal use, as a hobby or out of casual interest, rather than as a business or job. The quality of amateur work can be comparable to that of many professionals. Amateurs can fill a gap in subjects or topics that might not otherwise be photographed if they are not commercially useful or salable. Amateur photography grew during the late 19th century due to the popularization of the hand-held camera. [52] Twenty-first century social media and near-ubiquitous camera phones have made photographic and video recording pervasive in everyday life. In the mid-2010s smartphone cameras added numerous automatic assistance features like color management , autofocus face detection and image stabilization that significantly decreased skill and effort needed to take high quality images. [53] Commercial[ edit ] This section is in list format but may read better as prose . You can help by converting this section , if appropriate. Editing help is available. (January 2019) Commercial photography is probably best defined as any photography for which the photographer is paid for images rather than works of art . In this light, money could be paid for the subject of the photograph or the photograph itself. The commercial photographic world could include: Advertising photography: There are photographs made to illustrate and usually sell a service or product. These images, such as packshots , are generally done with an advertising agency , design firm or with an in-house corporate design team. Architectural photography focuses on capturing photographs of buildings and architectural structures that are aesthetically pleasing and accurate in terms of representations of their subjects. Event photography focuses on photographing guests and occurrences at mostly social events. Fashion and glamour photography usually incorporates models and is a form of advertising photography. Fashion photography , like the work featured in Harper's Bazaar , emphasizes clothes and other products; glamour emphasizes the model and body form while glamour photography is popular in advertising and men's magazines . Models in glamour photography sometimes work nude . 360 product photography displays a series of photos to give the impression of a rotating object. This technique is commonly used by ecommerce websites to help shoppers visualise products. Concert photography focuses on capturing candid images of both the artist or band as well as the atmosphere (including the crowd). Many of these photographers work freelance and are contracted through an artist or their management to cover a specific show. Concert photographs are often used to promote the artist or band in addition to the venue. Crime scene photography consists of photographing scenes of crime such as robberies and murders. A black and white camera or an infrared camera may be used to capture specific details. Still life photography usually depicts inanimate subject matter, typically commonplace objects which may be either natural or man-made. Still life is a broader category for food and some natural photography and can be used for advertising purposes. Real estate photography focuses on the production of photographs showcasing a property that is for sale, such photographs requires the use of wide-lens and extensive knowledge in high-dynamic-range imaging photography. Example of a studio-made food photograph Food photography can be used for editorial, packaging or advertising use. Food photography is similar to still life photography but requires some special skills. Photojournalism can be considered a subset of editorial photography. Photographs made in this context are accepted as a documentation of a news story. Paparazzi is a form of photojournalism in which the photographer captures candid images of athletes, celebrities, politicians, and other prominent people. Portrait and wedding photography : Are photographs made and sold directly to the end user of the images. Landscape photography typically captures the presence of nature but can also focus on human-made features or disturbances of landscapes. Wildlife photography demonstrates the life of wild animals. Main article: Art photography Classic Alfred Stieglitz photograph, The Steerage (1907) shows unique aesthetic of black-and-white photos. During the 20th century, both fine art photography and documentary photography became accepted by the English-speaking art world and the gallery system. In the United States, a handful of photographers, including Alfred Stieglitz , Edward Steichen , John Szarkowski , F. Holland Day , and Edward Weston , spent their lives advocating for photography as a fine art. At first, fine art photographers tried to imitate painting styles. This movement is called Pictorialism , often using soft focus for a dreamy, 'romantic' look. In reaction to that, Weston, Ansel Adams , and others formed the Group f/64 to advocate ' straight photography ', the photograph as a (sharply focused) thing in itself and not an imitation of something else. The aesthetics of photography is a matter that continues to be discussed regularly, especially in artistic circles. Many artists argued that photography was the mechanical reproduction of an image. If photography is authentically art, then photography in the context of art would need redefinition, such as determining what component of a photograph makes it beautiful to the viewer. The controversy began with the earliest images "written with light"; Nicéphore Niépce , Louis Daguerre , and others among the very earliest photographers were met with acclaim, but some questioned if their work met the definitions and purposes of art. Clive Bell in his classic essay Art states that only "significant form" can distinguish art from what is not art. There must be some one quality without which a work of art cannot exist; possessing which, in the least degree, no work is altogether worthless. What is this quality? What quality is shared by all objects that provoke our aesthetic emotions? What quality is common to Sta. Sophia and the windows at Chartres, Mexican sculpture, a Persian bowl, Chinese carpets, Giotto's frescoes at Padua, and the masterpieces of Poussin, Piero della Francesca, and Cezanne? Only one answer seems possible – significant form. In each, lines and colors combined in a particular way, certain forms and relations of forms, stir our aesthetic emotions. [54] On 7 February 2007, Sotheby's London sold the 2001 photograph 99 Cent II Diptychon for an unprecedented $3,346,456 to an anonymous bidder, making it the most expensive at the time. [55] Conceptual photography turns a concept or idea into a photograph. Even though what is depicted in the photographs are real objects, the subject is strictly abstract. Josef H. Neumann : Gustav I (1976) In parallel to this development, the then largely separate interface between painting and photography was closed in the second half of the 20th century with the chemigram of Pierre Cordier and the chemogram of Josef H. Neumann . [56] In 1974 the chemograms by Josef H. Neumann concluded the separation of the painterly background and the photographic layer by showing the picture elements in a symbiosis that had never existed before, as an unmistakable unique specimen, in a simultaneous painterly and at the same time real photographic perspective, using lenses,  within a photographic layer, united in colors and shapes. This Neumann chemogram from the seventies of the 20th century thus differs from the beginning of the previously created cameraless chemigrams of a Pierre Cordier and the photogram Man Ray or László Moholy-Nagy of the previous decades. These works of art were almost simultaneous with the invention of photography by various important artists who characterized Hippolyte Bayard , Thomas Wedgwood , William Henry Fox Talbot in their early stages, and later Man Ray and László Moholy-Nagy in the twenties and by the painter in the thirties Edmund Kesting and Christian Schad by draping objects directly onto appropriately sensitized photo paper and using a light source without a camera. [57]
Toggle the table of contents Comic book From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Publication of comics art This article is about periodicals containing comics. For the comics art medium, see Comics . Comic books on display at a museum, depicting how they would have been displayed at a rail station store in the first half of the 20th century. A common comic-book cover format displays the issue number, date, price and publisher along with an illustration and cover copy which may include a story's title. Comic books e A comic book, also called comicbook, [1] [2] comic magazine or simply comic, is a publication that consists of comics art in the form of sequential juxtaposed panels that represent individual scenes. Panels are often accompanied by descriptive prose and written narrative, usually, dialogue contained in word balloons emblematic of the comics art form. Comic Cuts was a British comic published from 1890 to 1953. It was preceded by Ally Sloper's Half Holiday (1884) which is notable for its use of sequential cartoons to unfold narrative. These British comics existed alongside the popular lurid " penny dreadfuls " (such as Spring-heeled Jack ), boys' " story papers " and the humorous Punch magazine which was the first to use the term "cartoon" in its modern sense of a humorous drawing. The first modern American-style comic book , Famous Funnies: A Carnival of Comics , was released in the U.S. in 1933 and was a reprinting of earlier newspaper humor comic strips , which had established many of the story-telling devices used in comics. [3] The term comic book derives from American comic books once being a compilation of comic strips of a humorous tone; however, this practice was replaced by featuring stories of all genres, usually not humorous in tone. The largest comic book market is Japan. By 1995, the manga market in Japan was valued at ¥ 586.4 billion ( $ 6–7 billion), [4] with annual sales of 1.9 billion manga books ( tankōbon volumes and manga magazines ) in Japan, equivalent to 15 issues per person. [5] In 2020 the manga market in Japan reached a new record value of ¥612.5 billion due to a fast growth of digital manga sales as well as an increase in print sales. [6] [7] The comic book market in the United States and Canada was valued at $1.09 billion in 2016. [8] As of 2017 [update] , the largest comic book publisher in the United States is manga distributor Viz Media , followed by DC Comics and Marvel Comics featuring superhero comics franchises such as Superman , Batman , Wonder Woman , Spider-Man , the Incredible Hulk and the X-Men . [9] The best-selling comic book categories in the US as of 2019 [update] are juvenile children's fiction at 41%, manga at 28% and superhero comics at 10% of the market. [10] Another major comic book market is France , where Franco-Belgian comics and Japanese manga each represent 40% of the market, followed by American comics at 10% market share. [11] Main article: Comics § Terminology Comic books heavily rely on their organization and visual presentation. Authors dedicate significant attention to aspects like page layout, size, orientation, and the positioning of panels. These characteristics are crucial for effectively conveying the content and messages within the comic book. Key components of comic books encompass panels, speech bubbles (also known as balloons), text lines, and characters. Speech balloons generally take the form of convex containers that hold character dialogue and are connected to the character via a tail element. The tail comprises an origin, path, tip, and directional point. The creation of comic books involves several essential steps: writing, drawing, and coloring. Various technological tools and methods are employed to craft comic books, incorporating concepts such as directions, axes, data, and metrics. Following these formatting guidelines, the process unfolds with writing, drawing, and coloring. [12] In the United States, the term "comic book", is generally used for comics periodicals and trade paperbacks while " graphic novel " is the term used for standalone books. [13] [14] American comic books[ edit ] Main article: American comic book Comics as a print medium have existed in the United States since the printing of The Adventures of Mr. Obadiah Oldbuck in 1842 in hardcover, [15] making it the first known American prototype comic book. Proto-comics periodicals began appearing early in the 20th century, with the first comic standard-sized comic being Funnies on Parade . Funnies on Parades was the first book that established the size, duration, and format of the modern comic book. Following this was, Dell Publishing 's 36-page Famous Funnies: A Carnival of Comics as the first true newsstand American comic book; Goulart, for example, calls it "the cornerstone for one of the most lucrative branches of magazine publishing". [16] In 1905 G.W. Dillingham Company published 24 select strips by the cartoonist Gustave Verbeek in an anthology book called 'The Incredible Upside-Downs of Little Lady Lovekins and Old Man Muffaroo'. [17] The introduction of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster 's Superman in 1938 turned comic books into a major industry [18] and ushered in the Golden Age of Comic Books . The Golden Age originated the archetype of the superhero . According to historian Michael A. Amundson , appealing comic-book characters helped ease young readers' fear of nuclear war and neutralize anxiety about the questions posed by atomic power. [19] Historians generally divide the timeline of the American comic book into eras. The Golden Age of Comic Books began in 1938, with the debut of Superman in Action Comics #1, published by Detective Comics (predecessor of DC Comics), which is generally considered the beginning of the modern comic book as it is known today. [20] The Silver Age of Comic Books is generally considered to date from the first successful revival of the then-dormant superhero form, with the debut of the Flash in Showcase #4 (Oct. 1956). [21] [22] The Silver Age lasted through the late 1960s or early 1970s, during which time Marvel Comics revolutionized the medium with such naturalistic superheroes as Stan Lee and Jack Kirby 's Fantastic Four and Lee and Steve Ditko 's Spider-Man . The demarcation between the Silver Age and the following era, the Bronze Age of Comic Books , is less well-defined, with the Bronze Age running from the very early 1970s through the mid-1980s. [23] The Modern Age of Comic Books runs from the mid-1980s to the present day. [24] A significant event in the timeline of American comic books occurred when psychiatrist Fredric Wertham voiced his criticisms of the medium through his book Seduction of the Innocent (1954). This critique led to the involvement of the American Senate Subcommittee on Juvenile Delinquency , which launched an investigation into comic books. Wertham argued that comic books were accountable for a surge in juvenile delinquency and posed a potential impact on a child's sexuality and moral values. [25] In response to attention from the government and from the media, the US comic book industry set up the Comics Magazine Association of America. [26] The CMAA instilled the Comics Code Authority in 1954 and drafted the self-censorship Comics Code that year, which required all comic books to go through a process of approval. It was not until the 1970s that comic books could be published without passing through the inspection of the CMAA. [27] The Code was made formally defunct in November 2011. Underground comic books[ edit ] Main article: Underground comix In the late 1960s and early 1970s, a surge of creativity emerged in what became known as underground comics . Published and distributed independently of the established comics industry, most of such comics reflected the youth counterculture and drug culture of the time. Underground comix "reflected and commented on the social divisions and tensions of American society".[ attribution needed ] [28] Many had an uninhibited, often irreverent style; their frank depictions of nudity, sex, profanity, and politics had no parallel outside their precursors, the pornographic and even more obscure " Tijuana bibles ". Underground comics were almost never sold at newsstands, but rather in such youth-oriented outlets as head shops and record stores, as well as by mail order . The underground comics encouraged creators to publish their work independently so that they would have full ownership rights to their characters. [28] Frank Stack 's The Adventures of Jesus, published under the name Foolbert Sturgeon, [29] [30] has been credited as the first underground comic; [29] [30] while R. Crumb and the crew of cartoonists who worked on Zap Comix popularized the form. Main article: Alternative comics The rise of comic book specialty stores in the late 1970s created and paralleled a dedicated market for "independent" or " alternative comics " in the US. The first such comics included the anthology series Star Reach , published by comic book writer Mike Friedrich from 1974 to 1979, and Harvey Pekar 's American Splendor , which continued sporadic publication into the 21st century and which Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini adapted into a 2003 film . Some independent comics continued in the tradition of underground comics. While their content generally remained less explicit, others resembled the output of mainstream publishers in format and genre but were published by smaller artist-owned companies or by single artists. A few (notably RAW ) represented experimental attempts to bring comics closer to the status of fine art . During the 1970s the " small press " culture grew and diversified. By the 1980s, several independent publishers – such as Pacific , Eclipse , First , Comico , and Fantagraphics – had started releasing a wide range of styles and formats—from color-superhero, detective , and science-fiction comic books to black-and-white magazine-format stories of Latin American magical realism . A number of small publishers in the 1990s, changed the format and distribution of their comics to more closely resemble non-comics publishing. The " minicomics " form, an extremely informal version of self-publishing , arose in the 1980s and became increasingly popular among artists in the 1990s, [31] despite reaching an even more limited audience than the small press. Small publishers regularly releasing titles include Avatar Press , Hyperwerks , Raytoons, and Terminal Press , buoyed by such advances in printing technology as digital print-on-demand . Graphic novels[ edit ] The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention published this instructional graphic novel in 2018 to keep youth from spreading infectious diseases Main article: Graphic novel In 1964, Richard Kyle coined the term " graphic novel ". [32] Precursors of the form existed by the 1920s, which saw a revival of the medieval woodcut tradition by Belgian Frans Masereel , [33] American Lynd Ward and others, including Stan Lee. In 1947, Fawcett Publications published "Comics Novel No. 1", as the first in an intended series of these "comics novels". The story in the first issue was "Anarcho, Dictator of Death", a five chapter spy genre tale written by Otto Binder and drawn by Al Carreno. It is readable online in the Digital Comic Museum . [34] The magazine never reached a second issue. In 1950, St. John Publications produced the digest-sized , adult-oriented "picture novel" It Rhymes with Lust , a 128-page digest by pseudonymous writer "Drake Waller" ( Arnold Drake and Leslie Waller ), penciler Matt Baker and inker Ray Osrin , touted as "an original full-length novel" on its cover. "It Rhymes with Lust" is also available to read online in the Digital Comic Museum. [35] In 1971, writer-artist Gil Kane and collaborators applied a paperback format to their "comics novel" Blackmark . Will Eisner popularized the term "graphic novel" when he used it on the cover of the paperback edition of his work A Contract with God, and Other Tenement Stories in 1978 and, subsequently, the usage of the term began to increase. Market size[ edit ] In 2017, the comic book market size for North America was just over $1 billion with digital sales being flat, book stores having a 1 percent decline, and comic book stores having a 10 percent decline over 2016. [36] The global comic book market saw a substantial 12% growth in 2020, reaching a total worth of US$8.49 billion. This positive trajectory continued in 2021, with the market's annual valuation surging to US$9.21 billion. The rising popularity of comic books can be attributed to heightened global interest, driven significantly by collaborative efforts among diverse brands. These collaborations are geared towards producing more engaging and appealing comic content, contributing to the industry's continued growth. [37] Comic book collecting[ edit ] Main article: Comic book collecting The 1970s saw the advent of specialty comic book stores . Initially, comic books were marketed by publishers to children because comic books were perceived as children's entertainment. However, with increasing recognition of comics as an art form and the growing pop culture presence of comic book conventions , they are now embraced by many adults. [26] Comic book collectors often exhibit a lifelong passion for the stories within comics, often focusing on specific superheroes and striving to gather a complete collection of a particular series. Comics are assigned sequential numbers, and the initial issue of a long-lasting comic book series tends to be both the scarcest and the most coveted among collectors. The introduction of a new character might occur within an existing title. For instance, the first appearance of Spider-Man took place in Amazing Fantasy #15. New characters were frequently introduced in this manner, waiting for an established audience before launching their own titles. Consequently, comics featuring the debut appearance of a significant character can sometimes be even more challenging to locate than the inaugural issue of that character's standalone series. Some rare comic books include copies of the unreleased Motion Picture Funnies Weekly #1 from 1939. Eight copies, plus one without a cover, emerged in the estate of the deceased publisher in 1974. The "Pay Copy" of this book sold for $43,125 in a 2005 Heritage auction. [38] The most valuable American comics have combined rarity and quality with the first appearances of popular and enduring characters. Four comic books have sold for over US$1 million as of December 2010 [update] , including two examples of Action Comics #1, the first appearance of Superman , [39] [40] both sold privately through online dealer ComicConnect.com in 2010, and Detective Comics #27, the first appearance of Batman , via public auction. Updating the above price obtained for Action Comics #1, the first appearance of Superman , the highest sale on record for this book is $3.2 million, for a 9.0 copy. [41] Misprints, promotional comic-dealer incentive printings, and issues with exceptionally low distribution tend to possess scarcity value in the comic book market. The rarest modern comic books include the original press run of The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen #5, which DC executive Paul Levitz recalled and pulped due to the appearance of a vintage Victorian era advertisement for "Marvel Douche ", which the publisher considered offensive; [42] only 100 copies exist, most of which have been CGC graded. (See Recalled comics for more pulped, recalled, and erroneous comics.) In 2000, a company named Comics Guaranty (CGC) initiated the practice of "slabbing" comics, which involves encasing them within thick plastic cases and assigning them a numerical grade. This approach inspired the emergence of Comic Book Certification Service . Given the significance of condition in determining the value of rare comics, the concept of grading by an impartial company, one that does not engage in buying or selling comics, seemed promising. Nevertheless, there is an ongoing debate regarding whether the relatively high cost of this grading service is justified and whether it serves the interests of collectors or mainly caters to speculators seeking rapid profits, akin to trading in stocks or fine art. Comic grading has played a role in establishing standards for valuation, which online price guides such as GoCollect and GPAnalysis utilize to provide real-time market value information. Collectors also seek out the original artwork pages from comic books, which are perhaps the most rarefied items in the realm of comic book collecting. These pages hold unparalleled scarcity due to the fact that there exists only one unique page of artwork for every page that was printed and published. The creation of these original artwork pages involves a collaborative effort: a writer crafts the story, a pencil artist designs the sequential panels on the page, an ink artist goes over the pencil with pen and ink, a letterer provides the dialogue and narration through hand-lettering, and finally, a colorist adds color as the final touch before the pages are sent to the printer. When the printer returns the original artwork pages, they are typically returned to the artists themselves. These artists sometimes opt to sell these pages at comic book conventions, in galleries, and at art shows centered around comic book art. The original pages from DC and Marvel, featuring the debut appearances of iconic characters such as Superman, Batman, Wonder Woman , the Flash , Captain Marvel , Spider-Man, the Incredible Hulk , Iron Man , Captain America and the Mighty Thor are regarded as priceless treasures within the comic book world. History of race in U.S. comic books[ edit ] This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: re-write to make less reliant on quotes, better fit WP's style. Please help improve this section if you can. (July 2019) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Many early iterations of black characters in comics "became variations on the 'single stereotypical image of Sambo'." [43] Sambo was closely related to the coon stereotype but had some subtle differences. They are both a derogatory way of portraying black characters. "The name itself, an abbreviation of raccoon, is dehumanizing. As with Sambo, the coon was portrayed as a lazy, easily frightened, chronically idle, inarticulate, buffoon." [44] This portrayal "was of course another attempt to solidify the intellectual inferiority of the black race through popular culture." [43] However, in the 1940s there was a change in portrayal of black characters. "A cursory glance...might give the impression that situations had improved for African Americans in comics." [43] In many comics being produced in this time there was a major push for tolerance between races. "These equality minded heroes began to spring to action just as African Americans were being asked to participate in the war effort." [43] During this time, a government ran program, the Writers' War Board, became heavily involved in what would be published in comics. "The Writers' War Board used comic books to shape popular perceptions of race and ethnicity..." [45] Not only were they using comic books as a means of recruiting all Americans, they were also using it as propaganda to "[construct] a justification for race-based hatred of America's foreign enemies." [45] The Writers' War Board created comics books that were meant to "[promote] domestic racial harmony". [45] However, "these pro-tolerance narratives struggled to overcome the popular and widely understood negative tropes used for decades in American mass culture...". [45] However, they were not accomplishing this agenda within all of their comics. In the comic series Captain Marvel Adventures, there was a character named Steamboat who embodied a collection of highly negative stereotypes prevalent during that period. The Writers' War Board did not request any alterations to this character despite the problematic portrayal. The removal of Steamboat from the series only came about due to the persistent advocacy of a black youth group based in New York City." [45] Originally their request was refused by individuals working on the comic stating, "Captain Marvel Adventures included many kinds of caricatures 'for the sake of humor'." [45] The black youth group responded with "this is not the Negro race, but your one-and-a-half millions readers will think it so." [45] Afterwards, Steamboat disappeared from the comics all together. There was a comic created about the 99th Squadron, also known as the Tuskegee Airmen , an all-black air force unit. Instead of making the comic about their story, the comic was about Hop Harrigan. A white pilot who captures a Nazi, shows him videos of the 99th Squadron defeating his men and then reveals to the Nazi that his men were defeated by African Americans which infuriated him as he sees them as a less superior race and cannot believe they bested his men."The Tuskegee Airmen, and images of black aviators appear in just three of the fifty three panels... the pilots of the 99th Squadron have no dialogue and interact with neither Hop Harrigan nor his Nazi captive." [45] During this time, they also used black characters in comic books as a means to invalidate the militant black groups that were fighting for equality within the U.S. "Spider-Man 'made it clear that militant black power was not the remedy for racial injustice'." [43] "The Falcon openly criticized black behavior stating' maybe it's important fo [ sic ] us to cool things down-so we can protect the rights we been fightin' for'." [43] This portrayal and character development of black characters can be partially blamed on the fact that, during this time, "there had rarely been a black artist or writer allowed in a major comics company." [43] Asian characters within comic books encountered similar prejudiced treatment as black characters did. They were subjected to dehumanizing depictions, with narratives often portraying them as "incompetent and subhuman." [45] In a 1944 edition of the publication United States Marines, there was a story titled The Smell of the Monkeymen. This narrative portrayed Japanese soldiers as brutish simians, and it depicted their concealed positions being betrayed by their repugnant body odor. [45] Chinese characters received the same treatment. "By the time the United States entered WWII, negative perceptions of Chinese were an established part of mass culture...." [45] However, concerned that the Japanese could use America's anti-Chinese material as propaganda they began "to present a more positive image of America's Chinese allies..." [45] Just as they tried to show better representation for Black people in comics they did the same for Asian people. However, "Japanese and Filipino characters were visually indistinguishable. Both groups have grotesque buckteeth, tattered clothing, and bright yellow skin." [45] "Publishers depicted America's Asian allies through derogatory images and language honed over the preceding decades." [45] Asian characters were previously portrayed as, "ghastly yellow demons". [43] During WWII, "[every] major superhero worth his spandex devoted himself to the eradication of Asian invaders." [43] There was "a constant relay race in which one Asian culture merely handed off the baton of hatred to another with no perceptible changes in the manner in which the characters would be portrayed." [43] "The only specific depiction of a Hispanic superhero[ dubious – discuss ] did not end well. In 1975, Marvel gave us Hector Ayala (a.k.a The White Tiger)." [43] "Although he fought for several years alongside the likes of much more popular heroes such as Spider-Man and Daredevil, he only lasted six years before sales of comics featuring him got so bad that Marvel had him retire. [43] The most famous Hispanic character is Bane, a villain from Batman." [43] The Native American representation in comic books "can be summed up in the noble savage stereotype" [43] " a recurring theme...urged American indians to abandon their traditional hostility towards the United States. They were the ones painted as intolerant and disrespectful of the dominant concerns of white America". [43] East Asian comics[ edit ] Main article: Manga Manga (漫画) are comic books or graphic novels originating from Japan. Most manga conform to a style developed in Japan in the late 19th century, though the art form has a long prehistory in earlier Japanese art . The term manga is used in Japan to refer to both comics and cartooning in general . Outside Japan, the word is typically used to refer to comics originally published in the country. Main article: Dōjinshi Dōjinshi (同人誌, fan magazine), fan-made Japanese comics, operate in a far larger market in Japan than the American "underground comics" market; the largest dōjinshi fair, Comiket , attracts 500,000 visitors twice a year. [46] Main article: Manhwa Manhwa (만화) are comic books or graphic novels originating from South Korea . The term manhwa is used in South Korea to refer to both comics and cartooning in general. Outside South Korea, the term usually refers to comics originally published in the country. Manhwa is greatly influenced by Japanese Manga comics though it differs from manga and manhua with its own distinct features. Main article: Webtoons Webtoons have become popular in South Korea as a new way to read comics. Thanks in part to different censorship rules, color and unique visual effects, and optimization for easier reading on smartphones and computers. More manhwa have made the switch from traditional print manhwa to online webtoons thanks to better pay and more freedom than traditional print manhwa. The webtoon format has also expanded to other countries outside of Korea like China, Japan, Southeast Asia, and Western countries. Major webtoon distributors include Lezhin , Naver , and Kakao .
Toggle the table of contents Animation From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Method of creating moving pictures "Animate" redirects here. For other uses, see Animate (disambiguation) and Animation (disambiguation) . This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this article. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. 2D computer animation moving at 10 frames per second (FPS) The bouncing ball animation above consists of these six frames repeated indefinitely. Animation is a filmmaking technique by which still images are manipulated to create moving images . In traditional animation , images are drawn or painted by hand on transparent celluloid sheets ( cels ) to be photographed and exhibited on film. Animation has been recognized as an artistic medium, specifically within the entertainment industry . Many animations are computer animations made with computer-generated imagery (CGI). Stop motion animation , in particular claymation , has continued to exist alongside these other forms. General overview[ edit ] Computer animation can be very detailed 3D animation , while 2D computer animation (which may have the look of traditional animation) can be used for stylistic reasons, low bandwidth, or faster real-time renderings . Other common animation methods apply a stop motion technique to two- and three-dimensional objects like paper cutouts , puppets , or clay figures . A cartoon is an animated film, usually a short film , featuring an exaggerated visual style . The style takes inspiration from comic strips , often featuring anthropomorphic animals , superheroes , or the adventures of human protagonists. Especially with animals that form a natural predator/prey relationship (e.g. cats and mice, coyotes and birds), the action often centers on violent pratfalls such as falls, collisions, and explosions that would be lethal in real life. The illusion of animation—as in motion pictures in general—has traditionally been attributed to the persistence of vision and later to the phi phenomenon and beta movement , but the exact neurological causes are still uncertain. The illusion of motion caused by a rapid succession of images that minimally differ from each other, with unnoticeable interruptions, is a stroboscopic effect . While animators traditionally used to draw each part of the movements and changes of figures on transparent cels that could be moved over a separate background, computer animation is usually based on programming paths between key frames to maneuver digitally created figures throughout a digitally created environment. Analog mechanical animation media that rely on the rapid display of sequential images include the phénakisticope , zoetrope , flip book , praxinoscope , and film. Television and video are popular electronic animation media that originally were analog and now operate digitally . For display on computers, technology such as the animated GIF and Flash animation were developed. In addition to short films, feature films , television series , animated GIFs, and other media dedicated to the display of moving images, animation is also prevalent in video games , motion graphics , user interfaces , and visual effects . [1] The physical movement of image parts through simple mechanics—for instance, moving images in magic lantern shows—can also be considered animation. The mechanical manipulation of three-dimensional puppets and objects to emulate living beings has a very long history in automata . Electronic automata were popularized by Disney as animatronics . Etymology[ edit ] The word "animation" stems from the Latin "animātiōn", stem of "animātiō", meaning "a bestowing of life". [2] The earlier meaning of the English word is "liveliness" and has been in use much longer than the meaning of "moving image medium". Main article: Early history of animation Long before modern animation began, audiences around the world were captivated by the magic of moving characters. For centuries, master artists and craftsmen have brought puppets, automatons , shadow puppets , and fantastical lanterns to life, inspiring the imagination through physically manipulated wonders. [3] Prof. Stampfers Stroboscopische Scheibe No. X (1833) A projecting praxinoscope , from 1882, here shown superimposing an animated figure on a separately projected background scene In 1833, the stroboscopic disc (better known as the phénakisticope ) introduced the principle of modern animation, which would also be applied in the zoetrope (introduced in 1866), the flip book (1868), the praxinoscope (1877) and film . Fantasmagorie (1908) by Émile Cohl When cinematography eventually broke through in the 1890s, the wonder of the realistic details in the new medium was seen as its biggest accomplishment. It took years before animation found its way to the cinemas. The successful short The Haunted Hotel (1907) by J. Stuart Blackton popularized stop-motion and reportedly inspired Émile Cohl to create Fantasmagorie (1908), regarded as the oldest known example of a complete traditional (hand-drawn) animation on standard cinematographic film. Other great artistic and very influential short films were created by Ladislas Starevich with his puppet animations since 1910 and by Winsor McCay with detailed hand-drawn animation in films such as Little Nemo (1911) and Gertie the Dinosaur (1914). [4] During the 1910s, the production of animated " cartoons " became an industry in the US. [5] Successful producer John Randolph Bray and animator Earl Hurd , patented the cel animation process that dominated the animation industry for the rest of the century. [6] [7] Felix the Cat , who debuted in 1919, became the first fully realized animal character in the history of American animation. [8] Feline Follies with Felix the Cat , silent, 1919 American golden age[ edit ] Main article: Golden Age of American animation In 1928, Steamboat Willie , featuring Mickey Mouse and Minnie Mouse , popularized film with synchronized sound and put Walt Disney 's studio at the forefront of the animation industry. Although Disney Animation's actual output relative to total global animation output has always been very small, the studio has overwhelmingly dominated the "aesthetic norms" of animation ever since. [9] The enormous success of Mickey Mouse is seen as the start of the golden age of American animation that would last until the 1960s. The United States dominated the world market of animation with a plethora of cel-animated theatrical shorts. [10] Several studios would introduce characters that would become very popular and would have long-lasting careers, including Walt Disney Productions ' Goofy (1932) and Donald Duck (1934), Fleischer Studios / Paramount Cartoon Studios ' Out of the Inkwell ' Koko the Clown (1918), Bimbo and Betty Boop (1930), Popeye (1933) and Casper (1945), Warner Bros. Cartoon Studios ' Looney Tunes ' Porky Pig (1935), Daffy Duck (1937), Elmer Fudd (1937–1940), Bugs Bunny (1938–1940), Tweety (1942), Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner (1949), MGM cartoon studio 's Tom and Jerry (1940) and Droopy , Universal Cartoon Studios ' Woody Woodpecker (1940), Terrytoons / 20th Century Fox 's Mighty Mouse (1942), and United Artists ' Pink Panther (1963). Features before CGI[ edit ] Italian-Argentine cartoonist Quirino Cristiani showing the cut and articulated figure of his satirical character El Peludo (based on President Yrigoyen ) patented in 1916 for the realization of his films, including the world's first animated feature film El Apóstol [11] In 1917, Italian-Argentine director Quirino Cristiani made the first feature-length film El Apóstol (now lost ), which became a critical and commercial success. It was followed by Cristiani's Sin dejar rastros in 1918, but one day after its premiere, the film was confiscated by the government. [12] After working on it for three years, Lotte Reiniger released the German feature-length silhouette animation Die Abenteuer des Prinzen Achmed in 1926, the oldest extant animated feature.[ citation needed ] [13] In 1937, Walt Disney Studios premiered their first animated feature (using the Rotoscope technique invented by Max Fleischer in 1915) Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , still one of the highest-grossing traditional animation features as of May 2020 [update] . [14] [15] The Fleischer studios followed this example in 1939 with Gulliver's Travels with some success. Partly due to foreign markets being cut off by the Second World War, Disney's next features Pinocchio , Fantasia (both 1940), Fleischer Studios' second animated feature Mr. Bug Goes to Town (1941–1942) and Disney's feature films Cinderella (1950), Alice in Wonderland (1951) and Lady and the Tramp (1955) failed at the box office. For decades afterward, Disney would be the only American studio to regularly produce animated features, until Ralph Bakshi became the first to also release more than a handful features. Sullivan-Bluth Studios began to regularly produce animated features starting with An American Tail in 1986.[ citation needed ] Although relatively few titles became as successful as Disney's features, other countries developed their own animation industries that produced both short and feature theatrical animations in a wide variety of styles, relatively often including stop motion and cutout animation techniques. Soviet Soyuzmultfilm animation studio, founded in 1936, produced 20 films (including shorts) per year on average and reached 1,582 titles in 2018. China, Czechoslovakia / Czech Republic, Italy, France, and Belgium were other countries that more than occasionally released feature films, while Japan became a true powerhouse of animation production, with its own recognizable and influential anime style of effective limited animation .[ citation needed ] Television[ edit ] Animation became very popular on television since the 1950s, when television sets started to become common in most developed countries. Cartoons were mainly programmed for children, on convenient time slots, and especially US youth spent many hours watching Saturday-morning cartoons . Many classic cartoons found a new life on the small screen and by the end of the 1950s, the production of new animated cartoons started to shift from theatrical releases to TV series. Hanna-Barbera Productions was especially prolific and had huge hit series, such as The Flintstones (1960–1966) (the first prime time animated series), Scooby-Doo (since 1969) and Belgian co-production The Smurfs (1981–1989). The constraints of American television programming and the demand for an enormous quantity resulted in cheaper and quicker limited animation methods and much more formulaic scripts. Quality dwindled until more daring animation surfaced in the late 1980s and in the early 1990s with hit series, the first cartoon of The Simpsons (1987), the animated television series such as The Simpsons (since 1989) and SpongeBob SquarePants (since 1999) as part of a "renaissance" of American animation.[ citation needed ] While US animated series also spawned successes internationally, many other countries produced their own child-oriented programming, relatively often preferring stop motion and puppetry over cel animation. Japanese anime TV series became very successful internationally since the 1960s, and European producers looking for affordable cel animators relatively often started co-productions with Japanese studios, resulting in hit series such as Barbapapa (The Netherlands/Japan/France 1973–1977), Wickie und die starken Männer/小さなバイキング ビッケ (Vicky the Viking) (Austria/Germany/Japan 1974), Maya the Bee (Japan/Germany 1975) and The Jungle Book (Italy/Japan 1989).[ citation needed ] Switch from cels to computers[ edit ] Main article: History of computer animation Computer animation was gradually developed since the 1940s. 3D wireframe animation started popping up in the mainstream in the 1970s, with an early (short) appearance in the sci-fi thriller Futureworld (1976). [16] The Rescuers Down Under was the first feature film to be completely created digitally without a camera. [17] It was produced using the Computer Animation Production System (CAPS), developed by Pixar in collaboration with The Walt Disney Company in the late 1980s, in a style similar to traditional cel animation . [18] [19] [20] The so-called 3D style, more often associated with computer animation, became the dominant technique following the success of Pixar's Toy Story (1995), the first computer-animated feature in this style. [21] Most of the cel animation studios switched to producing mostly computer-animated films around the 1990s, as it proved cheaper and more profitable. Not only the very popular 3D animation style was generated with computers, but also most of the films and series with a more traditional hand-crafted appearance, in which the charming characteristics of cel animation could be emulated with software, while new digital tools helped developing new styles and effects. [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] Economic status[ edit ] In 2010, the animation market was estimated to be worth circa US$80 billion. [28] By 2020, the value had increased to an estimated US$270 billion. [29] Animated feature-length films returned the highest gross margins (around 52%) of all film genres between 2004 and 2013. [30] Animation as an art and industry continues to thrive as of the early 2020s. [31] [32] [33] Education, propaganda and commercials[ edit ] The clarity of animation makes it a powerful tool for instruction, while its total malleability also allows exaggeration that can be employed to convey strong emotions and to thwart reality. It has therefore been widely used for other purposes than mere entertainment.[ citation needed ] During World War II, animation was widely exploited for propaganda. Many American studios , including Warner Bros. and Disney, lent their talents and their cartoon characters to convey to the public certain war values. Some countries, including China, Japan and the United Kingdom, produced their first feature-length animation for their war efforts.[ citation needed ] Animation has been very popular in television commercials, both due to its graphic appeal, and the humour it can provide. Some animated characters in commercials have survived for decades, such as Snap, Crackle and Pop in advertisements for Kellogg's cereals. [34] Tex Avery was the producer of the first Raid " Kills Bugs Dead " commercials in 1966, which were very successful for the company. [35] Other media, merchandise and theme parks[ edit ] Apart from their success in movie theaters and television series, many cartoon characters would also prove lucrative when licensed for all kinds of merchandise and for other media. Animation has traditionally been very closely related to comic books . While many comic book characters found their way to the screen (which is often the case in Japan, where many manga are adapted into anime ), original animated characters also commonly appear in comic books and magazines. Somewhat similarly, characters and plots for video games (an interactive form of animation that became its own medium) have been derived from films and vice versa. [36] Some of the original content produced for the screen can be used and marketed in other media. Stories and images can easily be adapted into children's books and other printed media. Songs and music have appeared on records and as streaming media.[ citation needed ] While very many animation companies commercially exploit their creations outside moving image media, The Walt Disney Company is the best known and most extreme example. Since first being licensed for a children's writing tablet in 1929, their Mickey Mouse mascot has been depicted on an enormous amount of products , as have many other Disney characters. This may have influenced some pejorative use of Mickey's name , but licensed Disney products sell well, and the so-called Disneyana has many avid collectors, and even a dedicated Disneyana Fan Club (since 1984). [37] Disneyland opened in 1955 and features many attractions that were based on Disney's cartoon characters. Its enormous success spawned several other Disney theme parks and resorts . Disney's earnings from the theme parks have relatively often been higher than those from their movies. Main article: List of animation awards As with any other form of media, animation has instituted awards for excellence in the field. Many are part of general or regional film award programs, like the China's Golden Rooster Award for Best Animation (since 1981). Awards programs dedicated to animation, with many categories, include ASIFA-Hollywood 's Annie Awards , the Emile Awards in Europe and the Anima Mundi awards in Brazil. [38] [39] [40]
Toggle the table of contents Board game From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of seated tabletop social play The board game Monopoly is licensed in 103 countries and printed in 37 languages. [1] Young girls playing a board game in the Iisalmi library in Finland, 2016 Board games are tabletop games that typically use pieces . These pieces are moved or placed on a pre-marked board (playing surface) and often include elements of table , card , role-playing , and miniatures games as well. Many board games feature a competition between two or more players. To show a few examples: in checkers (British English name 'draughts'), a player wins by capturing all opposing pieces, while Eurogames often end with a calculation of final scores. Pandemic is a cooperative game where players all win or lose as a team, and peg solitaire is a puzzle for one person. There are many varieties of board games. Their representation of real-life situations can range from having no inherent theme, such as checkers , to having a specific theme and narrative, such as Cluedo . Rules can range from the very simple, such as in snakes and ladders ; to deeply complex, as in Advanced Squad Leader . Play components now often include custom figures or shaped counters, and distinctively shaped player pieces commonly known as as well as traditional cards and dice. The time required to learn or master Ancient[ edit ] Classical board games are divided into four categories: race games (such as pachisi ), space games (such as noughts and crosses ), chase games (such as hnefatafl ), and games of displacement (such as chess ). [3] Board games have been played, traveled, and evolved [4] in most cultures and societies throughout history. Several important historical sites, artifacts, and documents shed light on early board games such as Jiroft civilization game boards [5] in Iran. Senet , found in Predynastic and First Dynasty burials of Egypt, c. 3500 BC and 3100 BC respectively, [6] is the oldest board game known to have existed. [7] Senet was pictured in a fresco painting found in Merknera's tomb (3300–2700 BC). [8] [9] [ better source needed ][ dubious – discuss ] Also from predynastic Egypt is mehen . [10] Hounds and jackals , another ancient Egyptian board game, appeared around 2000 BC. [11] [12] The first complete set of this game was discovered from a Theban tomb that dates to the 13th dynasty . [13] This game was also popular in Mesopotamia and the Caucasus . [14] Backgammon originated in ancient Mesopotamia about 5,000 years ago. [15] Ashtapada , chess , pachisi and chaupar originated in India. Go and liubo originated in China. Patolli originated in Mesoamerica played by the ancient Aztecs and the royal game of Ur was found in the royal tombs of Ur, dating to Mesopotamia 4,600 years ago. [16] Senet , one of the oldest known board games Royal game of Ur , southern Iraq, about 2600–2400 BCE Patolli game being watched by Macuilxochitl as depicted on page 048 of the Codex Magliabechiano Han dynasty glazed pottery tomb figurines playing liubo, with six sticks laid out to the side of the game board Further information: Eurogame § History Board games have a long tradition in Europe. The oldest records of board gaming in Europe date back to Homer 's Iliad (written in the 8th century BC), in which he mentions the Ancient Greek game of petteia . [17] This game of petteia would later evolve into the Roman ludus latrunculorum . [17] Board gaming in ancient Europe was not unique to the Greco-Roman world, with records estimating that the ancient Norse game of hnefatafl was developed sometime before 400AD. [18] In ancient Ireland, the game of fidchell or ficheall , is said to date back to at least 144 AD, [19] though this is likely an anachronism. A fidchell board dating from the 10th century has been uncovered in Co. Westmeath, Ireland. [20] The association of dice and cards with gambling led to all dice games except backgammon being treated as lotteries by dice in the gaming acts of 1710 and 1845 . [21] Early board game producers in the second half of the eighteenth century were mapmakers. The global popularization of Board Games, with special themes and branding, coincided with the formation of the global dominance of the British Empire . [22] John Wallis was an English board game publisher, bookseller, map/chart seller, printseller, music seller, and cartographer . With his sons John Wallis Jr. and Edward Wallis, he was one of the most prolific publishers of board games of the late 18th and early 19th centuries.[ citation needed ] John Betts' A Tour of the British Colonies and Foreign Possessions [23] and William Spooner's A Voyage of Discovery [24] were popular in the British empire. Kriegsspiel is a genre of wargaming developed in 19th century Prussia to teach battle tactics to officers. [25] Achilles and Ajax playing a board game overseen by Athena, Attic black-figure neck amphora, c. 510 BCE Box for Board Games, c. 15th century, Walters Art Museum An early games table desk (Germany, 1735) featuring chess / draughts (left) and nine men's morris (right) 'Game of Skittles', copy of 1660–68 painting by Pieter de Hooch in the Saint Louis Art Museum American[ edit ] The Mansion of Happiness (1843) The board game Traveller's Tour Through the United States and its sister game Traveller's Tour Through Europe were published by New York City bookseller F. & R. Lockwood in 1822 and claim the distinction of being the first board games published in the United States. [16] Margaret Hofer described the period of the 1880s–1920s as "The Golden Age" of board gaming in America. [26] Board game popularity was boosted, like that of many items, through mass production , which made them cheaper and more easily available. Chinese, Arabic, and Indian[ edit ] Outside of Europe and the U.S., many traditional board games are popular. In China, Go and many variations of chess are popular. In Africa and the Middle East, mancala is a popular board game archetype with many regional variations. In India, a community game called Carrom is popular. [27] Modern[ edit ] The number of board games published by year (1944–2017), as listed on BoardGameGeek . Expansion sets for existing games are marked in orange. In the late 1990s, companies began producing more new games to serve a growing worldwide market. [28] [29] In the 2010s, several publications said board games were amid a new Golden Age or "renaissance". [28] [30] [31] Board game venues also grew  in popularity; in 2016 alone, more than 5,000 board game cafés opened in the U.S., [32] and they were reported to be very popular in China as well. [33] Board games have been used as a mechanism for science communication . [34] Luck, strategy, and diplomacy[ edit ] Some games, such as chess, depend completely on player skill, while many children's games such as Candy Land and snakes and ladders require no decisions by the players and are decided purely by luck. [35] Two Qataris playing the traditional board game of damah Many games require some level of both skill and luck. A player may be hampered by bad luck in backgammon , Monopoly, or Risk ; but over many games, a skilled player will win more often. [36] The elements of luck can also make for more excitement at times, and allow for more diverse and multifaceted strategies, as concepts such as expected value and risk management must be considered.[ citation needed ] Luck may be introduced into a game by several methods. The use of dice of various sorts goes back to the earliest board games . These can decide everything from how many steps a player moves their token, as in Monopoly, to how their forces fare in battle, as in Risk, or which resources a player gains, as in Catan . Other games such as Sorry! use a deck of special cards that, when shuffled, create randomness. Scrabble does something similar with randomly picked letters. Other games use spinners, timers of random length, or other sources of randomness. German-style board games are notable for often having fewer elements of luck than many North American board games. [37] Luck may be reduced in favour of skill by introducing symmetry between players. For example, in a dice game such as Ludo , by giving each player the choice of rolling the dice or using the previous player's roll. Another important aspect of some games is diplomacy, that is, players, making deals with one another. Negotiation generally features only in games with three or more players, cooperative games being the exception. An important facet of Catan, for example, is convincing players to trade with you rather than with opponents. In Risk, two or more players may team up against others. Easy diplomacy involves convincing other players that someone else is winning and should therefore be teamed up against. Advanced diplomacy (e.g., in the aptly named game Diplomacy ) consists of making elaborate plans together, with the possibility of betrayal. [38] In perfect information games, such as chess, each player has complete information on the state of the game, but in other games, such as Tigris and Euphrates or Stratego , some information is hidden from players. This makes finding the best move more difficult and may involve estimating probabilities by the opponents.[ citation needed ] Main article: Digital tabletop game Many board games are now available as video games. These are aptly termed digital board games, and their distinguishing characteristic compared to traditional board games is they can now be played online against a computer or other players. Some websites (such as boardgamearena.com, yucata.de, etc.) [39] allow play in real time and immediately show the opponents' moves, while others use email to notify the players after each move. [40] The Internet and cheaper home printing has also influenced board games via print-and-play games that may be purchased and printed. [41] Some games use external media such as audio cassettes or DVDs in accompaniment to the game. [42] [43] There are also virtual tabletop programs that allow online players to play a variety of existing and new board games through tools needed to manipulate the game board but do not necessarily enforce the game's rules, leaving this up to the players. There are generalized programs such as Vassal , Tabletop Simulator and Tabletopia that can be used to play any board or card game, while programs like Roll20 and Fantasy Grounds that are more specialized for role-playing games. [44] [45] Some of these virtual tabletops have worked with the license holders to allow for use of their game's assets within the program; for example, Fantasy Grounds has licenses for both Dungeons & Dragons and Pathfinder materials, while Tabletop Simulator allows game publishers to provide paid downloadable content for their games. [46] [47] However, as these games offer the ability to add in the content through user modifications , there are also unlicensed uses of board game assets available through these programs. [48] Market[ edit ] The modern German board game Catan is printed in 30 languages and sold 15 million by 2009. While the board gaming market is estimated to be smaller than that for video games , it has also experienced significant growth from the late 1990s. [30] A 2012 article in The Guardian described board games as "making a comeback". [49] Other expert sources suggest that board games never went away, and that board games have remained a popular leisure activity which has only grown over time. [50] Another from 2014 gave an estimate that put the growth of the board game market at "between 25% and 40% annually" since 2010, and described the current time as the "golden era for board games". [30] The rise in board game popularity has been attributed to quality improvement (more elegant mechanics , components , artwork, and graphics) as well as increased availability thanks to sales through the Internet. [30] Crowd-sourcing for board games is a large facet of the market, with $233 million raised on Kickstarter in 2020. [51] A 1991 estimate for the global board game market was over $1.2 billion. [52] A 2001 estimate for the United States "board games and puzzle" market gave a value of under $400 million, and for United Kingdom, of about £50 million. [53] A 2009 estimate for the Korean market was put at 800 million won, [54] and another estimate for the American board game market for the same year was at about $800 million. [55] A 2011 estimate for the Chinese board game market was at over 10 billion yuan . [56] A 2013 estimate put the size of the German toy market at 2.7 billion euros (out of which the board games and puzzle market is worth about 375 million euros), and Polish markets at 2 billion and 280 million zlotys , respectively. [57] In 2009, Germany was considered to be the best market per capita, with the highest number of games sold per individual. [58] Hobby board games[ edit ] Some academics, such as Erica Price and Marco Arnaudo, have differentiated "hobby" board games and gamers from other board games and gamers. [59] [60] A 2014 estimate placed the U.S. and Canada market for hobby board games (games produced for a "gamer" market) at only $75 million, with the total size of what it defined as the "hobby game market" ("the market for those games regardless of whether they're sold in the hobby channel or other channels,") at over $700 million. [61] A similar 2015 estimate suggested a hobby game market value of almost $900 million. [62] Board games serve diverse interests. Left: kōnane for studious competition. Right: kōnane for lighthearted fun. A dedicated field of research into gaming exists, known as game studies or ludology. [63] While there has been a fair amount of scientific research on the psychology of older board games (e.g., chess , Go , mancala ), less has been done on contemporary board games such as Monopoly , Scrabble , and Risk , [64] and especially modern board games such as Catan , Agricola , and Pandemic . Much research has been carried out on chess, partly because many tournament players are publicly ranked in national and international lists, which makes it possible to compare their levels of expertise. The works of Adriaan de Groot , William Chase, Herbert A. Simon , and Fernand Gobet have established that knowledge, more than the ability to anticipate moves, plays an essential role in chess-playing ability. [65] Linearly arranged board games have improved children's spatial numerical understanding. This is because the game is similar to a number line in that they promote a linear understanding of numbers rather than the innate logarithmic one. [66] Research studies show that board games such as Snakes and Ladders result in children showing significant improvements in aspects of basic number skills such as counting, recognizing numbers, numerical estimation, and number comprehension. They also practice fine motor skills each time they grasp a game piece. [67] Playing board games has also been tied to improving children's executive functions [68] and help reduce risks of dementia for the elderly. [69] [70] Related to this is a growing academic interest in the topic of game accessibility, culminating in the development of guidelines for assessing the accessibility of modern tabletop games [71] and the extent to which they are playable for people with disabilities. [72] Additionally, board games can be therapeutic. Bruce Halpenny , a games inventor said when interviewed about his game, The Great Train Robbery : With crime you deal with every basic human emotion and also have enough elements to combine action with melodrama. The player's imagination is fired as they plan to rob the train. Because of the gamble, they take in the early stage of the game there is a build-up of tension, which is immediately released once the train is robbed. Release of tension is therapeutic and useful in our society because most jobs are boring and repetitive. [73] Playing games has been suggested as a viable addition to the traditional educational curriculum if the content is appropriate and the gameplay informs students on the curriculum content. [74] [75] Categories[ edit ] There are several ways in which board games can be classified, and considerable overlap may exist, so that a game belongs to several categories. [16] H. J. R. Murray 's A History of Board Games Other Than Chess (1952) has been called the first attempt to develop a "scheme for the classification of board games". [76] David Parlett 's Oxford History of Board Games (1999) defines four primary categories: race games (where the goal is to be the first to move all one's pieces to the final destination), space games (in which the object is to arrange the pieces into some special configuration), chase games (asymmetrical games, where players start the game with different sets of pieces and objectives) and displace games (where the main objective is the capture the opponents' pieces). Parlett also distinguishes between abstract and thematic games, the latter having a specific theme or frame narrative (ex. regular chess versus, for example, Star Wars -themed chess). [76] The following is a list of some of the most common game categories:
Toggle the table of contents Card game From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Game using playing cards as the primary device For other uses, see Card game (disambiguation) . The Card Players, 17th-century painting by Theodoor Rombouts A card game is any game that uses playing cards as the primary device with which the game is played, whether the cards are of a traditional design or specifically created for the game (proprietary). Countless card games exist, including families of related games (such as poker ). A small number of card games played with traditional decks have formally standardized rules with international tournaments being held, but most are folk games whose rules may vary by region, culture, location or from circle to circle. Traditional card games are played with a deck or pack of playing cards which are identical in size and shape. Each card has two sides, the face and the back. Normally the backs of the cards are indistinguishable. The faces of the cards may all be unique, or there can be duplicates. The composition of a deck is known to each player. In some cases several decks are shuffled together to form a single pack or shoe. Modern card games usually have bespoke decks, often with a vast amount of cards, and can include number or action cards. This type of game is generally regarded as part of the board game hobby. Games using playing cards exploit the fact that cards are individually identifiable from one side only, so that each player knows only the cards they hold and not those held by anyone else. For this reason card games are often characterized as games of chance or "imperfect information"—as distinct from games of strategy or perfect information , where the current position is fully visible to all players throughout the game. [1] Many games that are not generally placed in the family of card games do in fact use cards for some aspect of their play. Some games that are placed in the card game genre involve a board. The distinction is that the play in a card game chiefly depends on the use of the cards by players (the board is a guide for scorekeeping or for card placement), while board games (the principal non-card game genre to use cards) generally focus on the players' positions on the board, and use the cards for some secondary purpose. History[ edit ] 14th and 15th centuries[ edit ] Despite the presence of playing cards in Europe being recorded from around 1370, it is not until 1408 that the first card game is described in a document about the exploits of two card sharps ; although it is evidently very simple, the game is not named. In fact the earliest games to be mentioned by name are Gleek , Ronfa and Condemnade, the latter being the game played by the aforementioned card cheats. All three are recorded during the 15th century, [2] along with Karnöffel , first mentioned in 1426 and which is still played in several forms today, including Bruus , Knüffeln , Kaiserspiel and Styrivolt . Since the arrival of trick-taking games in Europe in the late 14th century, there have only been two major innovations. The first was the introduction of trump cards with the power to beat all cards in other suits. [3] Such cards were initially called trionfi and first appeared with the advent of Tarot cards in which there is a separate, permament trump suit comprising a number of picture cards. [4] The first known example of such cards was ordered by the Duke of Milan around 1420 and included 16 trumps with images of Greek and Roman gods. [5] Thus games played with Tarot cards appeared very early on and spread to most parts of Europe with the notable exceptions of the British Isles , the Iberian Peninsula , and the Balkans . [6] However, we do not know the rules of the early Tarot games; the earliest detailed description in any language being those published by the Abbé de Marolles in Nevers in 1637. [7] [8] The concept of trumps was sufficiently powerful that it was soon transferred to games played with far cheaper ordinary packs of cards, as opposed to expensive Tarot cards. The first of these was Triomphe , the name simply being the French equivalent of the Italian trionfi. Although not testified before 1538, its first rules were written by a Spaniard who left his native country for Milan in 1509 never to return; thus the game may date to the late 15th century. [9] [10] [11] Others games that may well date to the 15th century are Pochen – the game of Bocken or Boeckels being attested in Strasbourg in 1441 [12] – and Thirty-One , which is first mentioned in a French translation of a 1440 sermon by the Italian, Saint Bernadine , the name actually referring to two different card games: one like Pontoon and one like Commerce . [13] 16th century[ edit ] In the 16th century printed documents replace handwritten sources and card games become a popular topic with preachers, autobiographists and writers in general. A key source of the games in vogue in France and Europe at that time is François Rabelais , whose fictional character Gargantua played no less than 30 card games, many of which are recognisable. They include: Aluette , Bête , Cent, Coquimbert , Coucou , Flush or Flux, Gé (Pairs), Gleek , Lansquenet , Piquet , Post and Pair , Primero , Ronfa , Triomphe ,  Sequence, Speculation , Tarot and Trente-et-Un ; possibly Rams , Mouche and Brandeln as well. [14] Girolamo Cardano also provides invaluable information including the earliest rules of Trappola . Among the most popular were the games of Flusso and Primiera, which originated in Italy and spread throughout Europe, becoming known in England as Flush and Primero . [8] In Britain the earliest known European fishing game was recorded in 1522. [15] Another first was Losing Loadum , noted by Florio in 1591, which is the earliest known English point-trick game . [16] In Scotland, the game of Mawe , testified in the 1550s, evolved from a country game into one played at the royal Scottish court, becoming a favourite of James VI . [17] The ancestor of Cribbage – a game called Noddy – is mentioned for the first time in 1589, "Noddy" being the Knave turned for trump at the start of play. [18] 17th century[ edit ] The 17th century saw an upsurge in the number of new games being reported as well as the first sets of rules, those for Piquet appearing in 1632 and Reversis in 1634. [8] The first French games compendium, La Maison Académique, appeared in 1654 and it was followed in 1674 by Charles Cotton 's The Compleat Gamester , although an earlier manuscript of games by Francis Willughby was written sometime between 1665 and 1670. [19] Cotton records the first rules for the classic English games of Cribbage , a descendant of Noddy , and Whist , a development of English Trump or Ruff ('ruff' then meaning 'rob') in which four players were dealt 12 cards each and the dealer 'robbed' from the remaining stock of 4 cards. [20] Piquet was a two-player, trick-taking game that originated in France, probably in the 16th century and was initially played with 36 cards before, around 1690, the pack reduced to the 32 cards that gives the Piquet pack its name. Reversis is a reverse game in which players avoid taking tricks and appears to be an Italian invention that came to France around 1600 and spread rapidly to other countries in Europe. [8] In the mid-17th century, a certain game named after Cardinal Mazarin , prime minister to King Louis XIV , became very popular at the French royal court. Called Hoc Mazarin , it had three phases, the final one of which evolved into a much simpler game called Manille that was renamed Comète on the appearance of Halley's Comet in 1682. [21] In Comète the aim is to be first to shed all one's hand cards to sequences laid out in rows on the table. However, there are certain cards known as ' stops ' or hocs: cards that end a sequence and give the one who played it the advantage of being able to start a new sequence. This concept spread to other 17th and 18th century games including Poque , Comete , Emprunt , Manille , Nain Jaune and Lindor , [22] [23] all except Emprunt being still played in some form today. It was the 17th century that saw the second of the two great innovations being introduced into trick-taking games: the concept of bidding. [3] This first emerged in the Spanish game of Ombre , an evolution of Triomphe that "in its time, was the most successful card game ever invented." [24] Ombre's origins are unclear and obfuscated by the existence of a game called Homme or Bête in France, ombre and homme being respectively Spanish and French for 'man'. In Ombre, the player who won the bidding became the "Man" and played alone against the other two. The game spread rapidly across Europe, spawning variants for different numbers of players and known as Quadrille , Quintille, Médiateur and Solo . Quadrille went on to become highly fashionable in England during the 18th century and is mentioned several times, for example, in Jane Austen 's Pride and Prejudice . The first rules of any game in the German language were those for Rümpffen published in 1608 and later expanded in several subsequent editions. In addition, the first German games compendium, Palamedes Redivivus appeared in 1678, containing the rules for Hoick ( Hoc ), Ombre, Picquet (sic), Rümpffen and Thurnspiel. 18th century[ edit ] The evolution of card games continued apace, with notable national games emerging like Briscola and Tressette (Italy), Schafkopf (Bavaria), Jass (Switzerland), Mariage , the ancestor of Austria's Schnapsen and Germany's Sixty-Six , and Tapp Tarock , the progenitor of most modern central European Tarot games . Whist spread to the continent becoming very popular in the north and west. In France, Comet appeared, a game that later evolved into Nain Jaune and the Victorian game of Pope Joan . Preferans , a trick-taking card game version popular in Croatia Card games may be classified in different ways: by their objective, by the equipment used (e.g. number of cards and type of suits), by country of origin or by mechanism (how the game is played). Parlett and McLeod predominantly group cards games by mechanism of which there are five categories: outplay, card exchange, hand comparison, layout and a miscellaneous category that includes combat and compendium games. These are described in the following sections. [25] Outplay games[ edit ] Easily the largest category of games in which players have a hand of cards and must play them out to the table. Play ends when players have played all their cards. [25] See also: List of trick-taking games Trick-taking games are the largest category of outplay games. Players typically receive an equal number of cards and a trick involves each player playing a card face up to the table – the rules of play dictating what cards may be played and who wins the trick. [26] There are two main types of trick-taking game with different objectives. Both are based on the play of multiple tricks , in each of which each player plays a single card from their hand, and based on the values of played cards one player wins or "takes" the trick. In plain-trick games the aim is to win a number of tricks, a specific trick or as many tricks as possible, without regard to the actual cards. In point-trick games, the number of tricks is immaterial; what counts is the value, in points, of the cards captured. [26] Plain-trick games[ edit ] Many common Anglo-American games fall into the category of plain-trick games . The usual objective is to take the most tricks, but variations taking all tricks, making as few tricks (or penalty cards) as possible or taking an exact number of tricks. Bridge , Whist and Spades are popular examples. Hearts , Black Lady and Black Maria are examples of reverse games in which the aim is to avoid certain cards. Plain-trick games may be divided into the following 11 groups: [26] Whist group. A standard Whist pack is used with cards ranking in their natural order and four players playing in partnerships of two. Usually a trump suit is nominated through turning a card or bidding and the aim is to win as many tricks as possible. No trump games. As above but there is no trump suit. Put group. In Put , tricks are won by the highest card regardless of suit. Treys are usually highest. Last trick group. The player who makes the last trick wins (or loses) the hand. Trump group. Either trump games in which fewer cards are dealt (e.g. 5) or in which there are chosen suits . Ombre group. Ombre introduced one of the two most significant features in the history of card games: bidding. Other common characteristics of this family are 3 matadors and a talon of undealt cards. Boston group. Games of the Boston group are played like Whist, but players form alliances of two or three players depending on the outcome of bidding. Auction Whist group. Auction or Bid Whist games involved fixed partnerships and an auction to determine the contract to be played. Preference group. Games of the Préférence family are typically for three players who 10 cards each from a 32-card pack and bid to play alone against the other two. Exact bidding group. Players bid the exact number of tricks they expect to take and must achieve that to win. Multi-trick group. Mostly Oriental games in which several cards may be led to a trick at once. However, some European games of the trump group, such as Bruus , also include this feature. Point-trick games[ edit ] Point-trick games are all European or of European origin and include the Tarot card games . Individual cards have specific point values and the objective is usually to amass the majority of points by taking tricks, especially those with higher value cards. There are around nine main groups: [26] Tarot games. All Tarot games use Tarot cards for their original purpose of playing games and are either French- or Spanish-suited. The tarots form a special trump suit and the counting cards are the highest, second highest and lowest trumps along with the court cards . There are usually bonuses for certain feats or card combinations and most games have multiple contracts which the players may bid for. Notable examples include  German Cego , Austrian Tarock , French Tarot and Italian Minchiate . Manille group. A small group of mainly French and Spanish games originating in "Malille" characterised by the top card being the 9 in Spanish games or the 10 in Belgian and French games. Additional counters are the AKQJ. Couillon group. A small group from the Benelux countries in which the counters and highest cards are the ace (4), king (3), queen (2) and jack (1). A typical member is Luxembourgisch Konter a Matt . Trappola group. This family is virtually extinct. Its progenitor, Trappola , was a Venetian game that emerged in the 1500s and was played with a special pack that is still available from Piatnik today. The counters are the ace (6), king (5), knight (4) and jack (3). There were bonuses for certain trick-winning feats. All Fours group. Based on the old English game of All Fours in which there were game points for High (highest trump), Low (lowest trump), Jack (of trumps) and Game (most card points). Surviving members of the group include American Pitch , British Phat and Irish Don . Ace–ten games. The ace–ten family includes most of the national games of Europe including German Skat , French Belote , Dutch Klaberjass , Austrian Schnapsen , Spanish Tute , Swiss Jass , Portuguese Sueca , Italian Briscola and Czech Mariáš . Pinochle is an American example of French or Swiss origin. Ace–ten games may be further subdivided into the Schafkopf group, marriage group (which includes the Jass group), the Sedma group and the German Tarok group (which includes American games like frog and six-bid solo . Tresette group. Tressette is an Italian game with the odd card ranking of 32AKQJ7654. Aces count 1 point, treys, deuces and courts are worth 1⁄3 point each. Most are Italian variants of Tressette, but Les Quatre Sept is played in Canada. Reverse games. Historically the most significant was Reversis , now rarely played. The best known reverse game today is Black Lady albeit often misnamed after its predecessor, Hearts , thanks to Microsoft. Reverse games often feature in compendium games . Miscellaneous games. These include small families of Oriental games such as the King-Ten-Five group, in which the counters are the kings and tens (10 each) and fives (5), and Picture group, in which the AKQJT are worth 1 point each and in which Elfern is the only Western example. Of historical interest are Gleek and Penneech , while Cucco is one played with a special Cucco pack. Beating games[ edit ] In beating games the idea is to beat the card just played if possible, otherwise it must be picked up, either alone or together with other cards, and added to the hand. In many beating games the objective is to shed all one's cards, in which case they are also "shedding games". Well known examples include Crazy Eights and Mau Mau . [27] Adding games[ edit ] This is a small group whose ancestor is Noddy , now extinct, but which generated the far more interesting games of Costly Colours and Cribbage . Players play in turn and add the values of the cards as they go. The aim is to reach or avoid certain totals and also to score for certain combinations. [28] Fishing games[ edit ] "Fishing game" redirects here. For the video game genre, see fishing video game . In fishing games, cards from the hand are played against cards in a layout on the table, capturing table cards if they match. [29] Fishing games are popular in many nations, including China, where there are many diverse fishing games. Scopa is considered one of the national card games of Italy. Cassino is the only fishing game to be widely played in English-speaking countries. Zwicker has been described as a "simpler and jollier version of Cassino", played in Germany. [30] Tablanet (tablić) is a fishing-style game popular in Balkans . Main article: Matching game The object of a matching (or sometimes "melding") game is to acquire particular groups of matching cards before an opponent can do so. In Rummy , this is done through drawing and discarding, and the groups are called melds. Mahjong is a very similar game played with tiles instead of cards. Non-Rummy examples of match-type games generally fall into the "fishing" genre and include the children's games Go Fish and Old Maid . War group[ edit ] In games of the war group, [31] also called "catch and collect games" or "accumulating games", the object is to acquire all cards in the deck. Examples include most War type games, and games involving slapping a discard pile such as Slapjack . Egyptian Ratscrew has both of these features. Climbing games[ edit ] Climbing games are an Oriental family in which the idea is to play a higher card or combination of cards that the one just played. Alternatively a player must pass or may choose to pass even if able to beat. The sole Western example is the game of President , which is probably derived from an Asian game. [32] Card exchange games[ edit ] Card exchange games form another large category in which players exchange a card or cards from their hands with table cards or with other players with the aim, typically, of collecting specific cards or card combinations. Games of the rummy family are the best known. Draw and discard group[ edit ] In these games players draw a card from stock , make a move if possible or desired, and then discard a card to a discard pile . Almost all the games of this group are in the rummy family, but Golf is a non-rummy example. [33] Commerce group[ edit ] As the name might suggest, players exchange hand cards with a common pool of cards on the table. Examples include Schwimmen , Kemps , James Bond and Whisky Poker. They originated in the old European games of Thirty-One and Commerce . Cuckoo group[ edit ] A very old round game played in different forms in different countries. Players are dealt just one card and may try and swap it with a neighbour to avoid having the lowest card or, sometimes, certain penalty cards. The old French game is Coucou and its later English cousin is Ranter Go Round , also called Chase the Ace and Screw Your Neighbour. A family of such games played with special cards includes Italian Cucù , Scandinavian Gnav , Austrian Hexenspiel and German Vogelspiel . Quartet group[ edit ] Games involving collecting sets of cards, the best known of which is Happy Families . Highly successful is its German equivalent, Quartett, which may be played with a Skat pack , but is much more commonly played with proprietary packs. Card passing group[ edit ] Games involving passing cards to your neighbours. The classic game is Old Maid which may, however, be derived from German Black Peter and related to the French game of Vieux Garçon . Pig , with its variations of Donkey and Spoons , is also popular.
h The side to move is disadvantaged. The endgame (also end game or ending) is the stage of the game when there are few pieces left on the board. There are three main strategic differences between earlier stages of the game and the endgame: [40] Pawns become more important. Endgames often revolve around endeavors to promote a pawn by advancing it to the furthest rank . The king, which requires safeguarding from attack during the middlegame, emerges as a strong piece in the endgame. It is often brought to the center where it can protect its own pawns, attack enemy pawns, and hinder moves of the opponent's king. Zugzwang , a situation in which the player who is to move is forced to incur a disadvantage, is often a factor in endgames but rarely in other stages of the game. In the example diagram, either side having the move is in zugzwang: Black to move must play 1...Kb7 allowing White to promote the pawn after 2.Kd7; White to move must permit a draw, either by 1.Kc6 stalemate or by losing the pawn after any other legal move. Endgames can be classified according to the type of pieces remaining on the board. Basic checkmates are positions in which one side has only a king and the other side has one or two pieces and can checkmate the opposing king, with the pieces working together with their king. For example, king and pawn endgames involve only kings and pawns on one or both sides, and the task of the stronger side is to promote one of the pawns. Other more complicated endings are classified according to pieces on the board other than kings, such as " rook and pawn versus rook " endgames. History Main article: History of chess Origins Sasanian Empire King Khosrow I sits on his throne before the chessboard, while his vizir and the Indian envoy, probably sent by the Maukhari King Śarvavarman of Kannauj , are playing chess. Shahnama , 10th century AD. [41] [42] Texts referring to the origins of chess date from the beginning of the seventh century. Three are written in Pahlavi ( Middle Persian ) [43] and one, the Harshacharita , is in Sanskrit . [44] One of these texts, the Chatrang-namak, represents one of the earliest written accounts of chess. The narrator Bozorgmehr explains that Chatrang, "Chess" in Pahlavi, was introduced to Persia by ' Dewasarm , a great ruler of India' during the reign of Khosrow I : [45] Dewasarm has fashioned this chatrang after the likeness of a battle, and in its likeness are two supreme rulers after the likeness of Kings (shah), with the essentials of rooks (rukh) to right and to left, with Counsellor (farzin) in the likeness of a commander of the champions, with the Elephant (pil) in the likeness of the commander of the rearguard, with Horse (asp) in the likeness of the commander of the cavalry, with the Footsoldier (piyadak) in the likeness of so many infantry in the vanguard of the battle Translation by Murray, 1913 [46] The oldest known chess manual was in Arabic and dates to about 840, written by al-Adli ar-Rumi (800–870), a renowned Arab chess player, titled Kitab ash-shatranj (The Book of Chess). This is a lost manuscript, but is referenced in later works. [47] Here also, al-Adli attributes the origins of Persian chess to India, along with the eighth-century collection of fables Kalīla wa-Dimna . [48] By the 20th century, a substantial consensus [49] [50] developed regarding chess's origins in northwest India in the early seventh century. [51] More recently, this consensus has been the subject of further scrutiny. [52] The early forms of chess in India were known as chaturaṅga ( Sanskrit : चतुरङ्ग), literally "four divisions" [of the military] – infantry , cavalry , elephants , and chariotry – represented by pieces that would later evolve into the modern pawn, knight, bishop, and rook, respectively. Chaturanga was played on an 8×8 uncheckered board, called ashtāpada . [53] Thence it spread eastward and westward along the Silk Road . The earliest evidence of chess is found in nearby Sasanian Persia around 600 A.D., where the game came to be known by the name chatrang ( Persian : چترنگ). [54] Chatrang was taken up by the Muslim world after the Islamic conquest of Persia (633–51), where it was then named shatranj ( Arabic : شطرنج; Persian : شترنج), with the pieces largely retaining their Persian names. In Spanish, "shatranj" was rendered as ajedrez ("al-shatranj"), in Portuguese as xadrez, and in Greek as ζατρίκιον (zatrikion, which comes directly from the Persian chatrang), [55] but in the rest of Europe it was replaced by versions of the Persian shāh ("king"), from which the English words "check" and "chess" descend. [note 3] The word " checkmate " is derived from the Persian shāh māt ("the king is dead"). [56] Knights Templar playing chess, Libro de los juegos , 1283 Xiangqi is the form of chess best known in China. The eastern migration of chess, into China and Southeast Asia, has even less documentation than its migration west, making it largely conjectured. The word xiàngqí (象棋) was used in China to refer to a game from 569 A.D. at the latest, but it has not been proven if this game was or was not directly related to chess. [57] [58] The first reference to Chinese chess appears in a book entitled Xuánguaì Lù (玄怪錄; "Record of the Mysterious and Strange"), dating to about 800. A minority view holds that Western chess arose from xiàngqí or one of its predecessors. [59] [60] Chess historians Jean-Louis Cazaux and Rick Knowlton contend that xiangqi's intrinsic characteristics make it easier to construct an evolutionary path from China to India/Persia than the opposite direction. [61] The oldest archaeological chess artifacts – ivory pieces – were excavated in ancient Afrasiab , today's Samarkand , in Uzbekistan , Central Asia, and date to about 760, with some of them possibly being older. Remarkably, almost all findings of the oldest pieces come from along the Silk Road, from the former regions of the Tarim Basin (today's Xinjiang in China), Transoxiana , Sogdiana , Bactria , Gandhara , to Iran on one end and to India through Kashmir on the other. [62] The game reached Western Europe and Russia via at least three routes, the earliest being in the ninth century. By the year 1000, it had spread throughout both the Muslim Iberia and Latin Europe . [63] A Latin poem called Versus de scachis ("Verses on Chess") dated to the late 10th century, has been preserved at Einsiedeln Abbey in Switzerland. 1200–1700: Origins of the modern game The game of chess was then played and known in all European countries. A famous 13th-century Spanish manuscript covering chess, backgammon , and dice is known as the Libro de los juegos , which is the earliest European treatise on chess as well as being the oldest document on European tables games . The rules were fundamentally similar to those of the Arabic shatranj . The differences were mostly in the use of a checkered board instead of a plain monochrome board used by Arabs and the habit of allowing some or all pawns to make an initial double step. In some regions, the queen, which had replaced the wazir , or the king could also make an initial two-square leap under some conditions. [64] A tactical puzzle from Lucena's 1497 book Around 1200, the rules of shatranj started to be modified in Europe, culminating, several major changes later, in the emergence of modern chess practically as it is known today. [65] A major change was the modern piece movement rules, which began to appear in intellectual circles in Valencia , Spain, around 1475, [note 4] which established the foundations and brought it very close to current chess. These new rules then were quickly adopted in Italy and Southern France before diffusing into the rest of Europe. [68] [69] Pawns gained the ability to advance two squares on their first move, while bishops and queens acquired their modern movement powers. The queen replaced the earlier vizier chess piece toward the end of the 10th century and by the 15th century had become the most powerful piece; [70] in light of that, modern chess was often referred to at the time as "Queen's Chess" or "Mad Queen Chess". [71] Castling, derived from the "king's leap", usually in combination with a pawn or rook move to bring the king to safety, was introduced. These new rules quickly spread throughout Western Europe. Writings about chess theory began to appear in the late 15th century. An anonymous treatise on chess of 1490 with the first part containing some openings and the second 30 endgames is deposited in the library of the University of Göttingen . [72] The book El Libro dels jochs partitis dels schachs en nombre de 100 was written by Francesc Vicent in Segorbe in 1495, but no copy of this work has survived. [72] The Repetición de Amores y Arte de Ajedrez (Repetition of Love and the Art of Playing Chess) by Spanish churchman Luis Ramírez de Lucena was published in Salamanca in 1497. [69] Lucena and later masters like Portuguese Pedro Damiano , Italians Giovanni Leonardo Di Bona , Giulio Cesare Polerio and Gioachino Greco , and Spanish bishop Ruy López de Segura developed elements of opening theory and started to analyze simple endgames . 1700–1873: Romantic era The " Immortal Game ", Anderssen vs. Kieseritzky, 1851 In the 18th century, the center of European chess life moved from Southern Europe to mainland France. The two most important French masters were François-André Danican Philidor , a musician by profession, who discovered the importance of pawns for chess strategy, and later Louis-Charles Mahé de La Bourdonnais , who won a famous series of matches against Irish master Alexander McDonnell in 1834. [73] Centers of chess activity in this period were coffee houses in major European cities like Café de la Régence in Paris and Simpson's Divan in London. [74] [75] At the same time, the intellectual movement of romanticism had had a far-reaching impact on chess, with aesthetics and tactical beauty being held in higher regard than objective soundness and strategic planning. As a result, virtually all games began with the Open Game , and it was considered unsportsmanlike to decline gambits that invited tactical play such as the King's Gambit and the Evans Gambit . [76] This chess philosophy is known as Romantic chess , and a sharp, tactical style consistent with the principles of chess romanticism was predominant until the late 19th century. [77] The rules concerning stalemate were finalized in the early 19th century. Also in the 19th century, the convention that White moves first was established (formerly either White or Black could move first). Finally, the rules around castling and en passant captures were standardized – variations in these rules persisted in Italy until the late 19th century. The resulting standard game is sometimes referred to as Western chess [78] or international chess, [79] particularly in Asia where other games of the chess family such as xiangqi are prevalent. Since the 19th century, the only rule changes, such as the establishment of the correct procedure for claiming a draw by repetition, have been technical in nature. Chess in the Netherlands (1864) As the 19th century progressed, chess organization developed quickly. Many chess clubs , chess books, and chess journals appeared. There were correspondence matches between cities; for example, the London Chess Club played against the Edinburgh Chess Club in 1824. [80] Chess problems became a regular part of 19th-century newspapers; Bernhard Horwitz , Josef Kling , and Samuel Loyd composed some of the most influential problems. In 1843, von der Lasa published his and Bilguer's Handbuch des Schachspiels (Handbook of Chess), the first comprehensive manual of chess theory. The first modern chess tournament was organized by Howard Staunton , a leading English chess player, and was held in London in 1851 . It was won by the German Adolf Anderssen , who was hailed as the leading chess master. His brilliant, energetic attacking style was typical for the time . [81] [82] Sparkling games like Anderssen's Immortal Game and Evergreen Game or Morphy's " Opera Game " were regarded as the highest possible summit of the art of chess. [83] Deeper insight into the nature of chess came with the American Paul Morphy , an extraordinary chess prodigy . Morphy won against all important competitors (except Staunton, who refused to play), including Anderssen, during his short chess career between 1857 and 1863. Morphy's success stemmed from a combination of brilliant attacks and sound strategy; he intuitively knew how to prepare attacks. [84] 1873–1945: Birth of a sport Wilhelm Steinitz , the first official World Chess Champion , from 1886 to 1894 Prague -born Wilhelm Steinitz laid the foundations for a scientific approach to the game, the art of breaking a position down into components [85] and preparing correct plans. [86] In addition to his theoretical achievements, Steinitz founded an important tradition: his triumph over the leading German master Johannes Zukertort in 1886 is regarded as the first official World Chess Championship . This win marked a stylistic transition at the highest levels of chess from an attacking, tactical style predominant in the Romantic era to a more positional, strategic style introduced to the chess world by Steinitz. Steinitz lost his crown in 1894 to a much younger player, the German mathematician Emanuel Lasker , who maintained this title for 27 years, the longest tenure of any world champion. [87] After the end of the 19th century, the number of master tournaments and matches held annually quickly grew. The first Olympiad was held in Paris in 1924, and FIDE was founded initially for the purpose of organizing that event. In 1927, the Women's World Chess Championship was established; the first to hold the title was Czech-English master Vera Menchik . [88] A prodigy from Cuba, José Raúl Capablanca , known for his skill in endgames, won the World Championship from Lasker in 1921. Capablanca was undefeated in tournament play for eight years, from 1916 to 1924. His successor (1927) was the Russian-French Alexander Alekhine , a strong attacking player who died as the world champion in 1946. Alekhine briefly lost the title to Dutch player Max Euwe in 1935 and regained it two years later. [89] In the interwar period , chess was revolutionized by the new theoretical school of so-called hypermodernists like Aron Nimzowitsch and Richard Réti . They advocated controlling the of the board with distant pieces rather than with pawns, thus inviting opponents to occupy the center with pawns, which become objects of attack. [90] 1945–1990: Post-World War II era Mikhail Botvinnik , the first post-war World Champion Bobby Fischer , World Champion from 1972 to 1975 After the death of Alekhine, a new World Champion was sought. FIDE, which has controlled the title since then, ran a tournament of elite players. The winner of the 1948 tournament was Russian Mikhail Botvinnik . In 1950, FIDE established a system of titles, conferring the titles of Grandmaster and International Master on 27 players. (Some sources state that, in 1914, the title of chess Grandmaster was first formally conferred by Tsar Nicholas II of Russia to Lasker, Capablanca, Alekhine, Tarrasch , and Marshall , but this is a disputed claim. [note 5] ) Botvinnik started an era of Soviet dominance in the chess world, which mainly through the Soviet government's politically inspired efforts to demonstrate intellectual superiority over the West [91] [92] stood almost uninterrupted for more than a half-century. Until the dissolution of the Soviet Union , there was only one non-Soviet champion, American Bobby Fischer (champion 1972–1975). [93] Botvinnik also revolutionized opening theory . Previously, Black strove for equality, attempting to neutralize White's first-move advantage . As Black, Botvinnik strove for the initiative from the beginning. [94] In the previous informal system of World Championships, the current champion decided which challenger he would play for the title and the challenger was forced to seek sponsors for the match. FIDE set up a new system of qualifying tournaments and matches. The world's strongest players were seeded into Interzonal tournaments, where they were joined by players who had qualified from Zonal tournaments. The leading finishers in these Interzonals would go through the " Candidates " stage, which was initially a tournament, and later a series of knockout matches. The winner of the Candidates would then play the reigning champion for the title. A champion defeated in a match had a right to play a rematch a year later. This system operated on a three-year cycle. Botvinnik participated in championship matches over a period of fifteen years. He won the world championship tournament in 1948 and retained the title in tied matches in 1951 and 1954. In 1957, he lost to Vasily Smyslov , but regained the title in a rematch in 1958. In 1960, he lost the title to the 23-year-old Latvian prodigy Mikhail Tal , an accomplished tactician and attacking player who is widely regarded as one of the most creative players ever, [95] hence his nickname "the magician from Riga". Botvinnik again regained the title in a rematch in 1961. Following the 1961 event, FIDE abolished the automatic right of a deposed champion to a rematch, and the next champion, Armenian Tigran Petrosian , a player renowned for his defensive and positional skills, held the title for two cycles, 1963–1969. His successor, Boris Spassky from Russia (champion 1969–1972), won games in both positional and sharp tactical style. [96] The next championship, the so-called Match of the Century , saw the first non-Soviet challenger since World War II, American Bobby Fischer . Fischer defeated his opponents in the Candidates matches by unheard-of margins, and convincingly defeated Spassky for the world championship. The match was followed closely by news media of the day, leading to a surge in popularity for chess; it also held significant political importance at the height of the Cold War , with the match being seen by both sides as a microcosm of the conflict between East and West. [97] In 1975, however, Fischer refused to defend his title against Soviet Anatoly Karpov when he was unable to reach agreement on conditions with FIDE, and Karpov obtained the title by default. [98] Fischer modernized many aspects of chess, especially by extensively preparing openings. [99] Karpov defended his title twice against Viktor Korchnoi and dominated the 1970s and early 1980s with a string of tournament successes. [100] In the 1984 World Chess Championship , Karpov faced his toughest challenge to date, the young Garry Kasparov from Baku , Soviet Azerbaijan . The match was aborted in controversial circumstances after 5 months and 48 games with Karpov leading by 5 wins to 3, but evidently exhausted; many commentators believed Kasparov, who had won the last two games, would have won the match had it continued. Kasparov won the 1985 rematch . Kasparov and Karpov contested three further closely fought matches in 1986, 1987 and 1990, Kasparov winning them all. [101] Kasparov became the dominant figure of world chess from the mid-1980s until his retirement from competition in 2005. Beginnings of chess technology Chess-playing computer programs (later known as chess engines ) began to appear in the 1960s. In 1970, the first major computer chess tournament, the North American Computer Chess Championship , was held, followed in 1974 by the first World Computer Chess Championship . In the late 1970s, dedicated home chess computers such as Fidelity Electronics' Chess Challenger became commercially available, as well as software to run on home computers. The overall standard of computer chess was low, however, until the 1990s. The first endgame tablebases , which provided perfect play for relatively simple endgames such as king and rook versus king and bishop, appeared in the late 1970s. This set a precedent to the complete six- and seven-piece tablebases that became available in the 2000s and 2010s respectively. [102] The first commercial chess database , a collection of chess games searchable by move and position, was introduced by the German company ChessBase in 1987. Databases containing millions of chess games have since had a profound effect on opening theory and other areas of chess research. Digital chess clocks were invented in 1973, though they did not become commonplace until the 1990s. Digital clocks allow for time controls involving increments and delays . 1990–present: Rise of computers and online chess Technology The Internet enabled online chess as a new medium of playing, with chess servers allowing users to play other people from different parts of the world in real time. The first such server, known as Internet Chess Server or ICS, was developed at the University of Utah in 1992. ICS formed the basis for the first commercial chess server, the Internet Chess Club , which was launched in 1995, and for other early chess servers such as FICS (Free Internet Chess Server). Since then, many other platforms have appeared, and online chess began to rival over-the-board chess in popularity. [103] [104] During the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic , the isolation ensuing from quarantines imposed in many places around the world, combined with the success of the popular Netflix show The Queen's Gambit and other factors such as the popularity of online tournaments (notably PogChamps ) and chess Twitch streamers, resulted in a surge of popularity not only for online chess, but for the game of chess in general; this phenomenon has been referred to in the media as the 2020 online chess boom. [105] [106] Computer chess has also seen major advances. By the 1990s, chess engines could consistently defeat most amateurs, and in 1997 Deep Blue defeated World Champion Garry Kasparov in a six-game match , starting an era of computer dominance at the highest level of chess. In the 2010s, engines significantly stronger than even the best human players became accessible for free on a number of PC and mobile platforms, and free engine analysis became a commonplace feature on internet chess servers. An adverse effect of the easy availability of engine analysis on hand-held devices and personal computers has been the rise of computer cheating , which has grown to be a major concern in both over-the-board and online chess. [107] In 2017, AlphaZero – a neural network also capable of playing shogi and Go – was introduced. Since then, many chess engines based on neural network evaluation have been written, the best of which have surpassed the traditional " brute-force " engines. AlphaZero also introduced many novel ideas and ways of playing the game, which affected the style of play at the top level. [108] As endgame tablebases developed, they began to provide perfect play in endgame positions in which the game-theoretical outcome was previously unknown, such as positions with king, queen and pawn against king and queen. In 1991, Lewis Stiller published a tablebase for select six-piece endgames, [109] [110] and by 2005, following the publication of Nalimov tablebases, all six-piece endgame positions were solved. In 2012, Lomonosov tablebases were published which solved all seven-piece endgame positions. [111] Use of tablebases enhances the performance of chess engines by providing definitive results in some branches of analysis. Technological progress made in the 1990s and the 21st century has influenced the way that chess is studied at all levels, as well as the state of chess as a spectator sport . Previously, preparation at the professional level required an extensive chess library and several subscriptions to publications such as Chess Informant to keep up with opening developments and study opponents' games. Today, preparation at the professional level involves the use of databases containing millions of games, and engines to analyze different opening variations and prepare novelties. [112] A number of online learning resources are also available for players of all levels, such as online courses, tactics trainers, and video lessons. [113] Since the late 1990s, it has been possible to follow major international chess events online, the players' moves being relayed in real time. Sensory boards have been developed to enable automatic transmission of moves. Chess players will frequently run engines while watching these games, allowing them to quickly identify mistakes by the players and spot tactical opportunities. While in the past the moves have been relayed live, today chess organizers will often impose a half-hour delay as an anti-cheating measure. In the mid-to-late 2010s – and especially following the 2020 online boom – it became commonplace for supergrandmasters , such as Hikaru Nakamura and Magnus Carlsen , to livestream chess content on platforms such as Twitch . [114] [115] Also following the boom, online chess started being viewed as an esport , with esport teams signing chess players for the first time in 2020. [116] Growth Organized chess even for young children has become common. FIDE holds world championships for age levels down to 8 years old. The largest tournaments, in number of players, are those held for children. [117] The number of grandmasters and other chess professionals has also grown in the modern era. Kenneth Regan and Guy Haworth conducted research involving comparison of move choices by players of different levels and from different periods with the analysis of strong chess engines; they concluded that the increase in the number of grandmasters and higher Elo ratings of the top players reflect an actual increase in the average standard of play, rather than "rating inflation" or "title inflation". [118] Professional chess In 1993, Garry Kasparov and Nigel Short broke ties with FIDE to organize their own match for the World Championship and formed a competing Professional Chess Association (PCA). From then until 2006, there were two simultaneous World Championships and respective World Champions: the PCA or "classical" champions extending the Steinitzian tradition in which the current champion plays a challenger in a series of games, and the other following FIDE's new format of many players competing in a large knockout tournament to determine the champion. Kasparov lost his PCA title in 2000 to Vladimir Kramnik of Russia. [119] Due to the complicated state of world chess politics and difficulties obtaining commercial sponsorships, Kasparov was never able to challenge for the title again. Despite this, he continued to dominate in top level tournaments and remained the world's highest rated player until his retirement from competitive chess in 2005. The World Chess Championship 2006 , in which Kramnik beat the FIDE World Champion Veselin Topalov , reunified the titles and made Kramnik the undisputed World Chess Champion. [120] In September 2007, he lost the title to Viswanathan Anand of India, who won the championship tournament in Mexico City . Anand defended his title in the revenge match of 2008 , [121] 2010 and 2012. Magnus Carlsen defeated Anand in the 2013 World Chess Championship , and defended his title in 2014, 2016, 2018, and 2021. After the 2021 match, he announced that he would not defend his title a fifth time, so the 2023 World Chess Championship was played between the winner and runner-up of the Candidates Tournament 2022 : respectively, Ian Nepomniachtchi of Russia and Ding Liren of China. Ding beat Nepomniachtchi, making him the current World Chess Champion. [12] Connections Main article: Chess in the arts In the Middle Ages and during the Renaissance , chess was a part of noble culture; it was used to teach war strategy and was dubbed the " King's Game ". [122] Gentlemen are "to be meanly seene in the play at Chestes", says the overview at the beginning of Baldassare Castiglione 's The Book of the Courtier (1528, English 1561 by Sir Thomas Hoby), but chess should not be a gentleman's main passion. Castiglione explains it further: Noble chess players, Germany, c. 1320 And what say you to the game at chestes? It is truely an honest kynde of enterteynmente and wittie, quoth Syr Friderick. But me think it hath a fault, whiche is, that a man may be to couning at it, for who ever will be excellent in the playe of chestes, I beleave he must beestowe much tyme about it, and applie it with so much study, that a man may assoone learne some noble scyence, or compase any other matter of importaunce, and yet in the ende in beestowing all that laboure, he knoweth no more but a game. Therfore in this I beleave there happeneth a very rare thing, namely, that the meane is more commendable, then the excellency. [123] Some of the elaborate chess sets used by the aristocracy at least partially survive, such as the Lewis chessmen . Chess was often used as a basis of sermons on morality . An example is Liber de moribus hominum et officiis nobilium sive super ludo scacchorum ('Book of the customs of men and the duties of nobles or the Book of Chess'), written by an Italian Dominican friar Jacobus de Cessolis c. 1300. This book was one of the most popular of the Middle Ages. [124] The work was translated into many other languages (the first printed edition was published at Utrecht in 1473) and was the basis for William Caxton 's The Game and Playe of the Chesse (1474), one of the first books printed in English. [125] Different chess pieces were used as metaphors for different classes of people, and human duties were derived from the rules of the game or from visual properties of the chess pieces: [126] The knyght ought to be made alle armed upon an hors in suche wyse that he haue an helme on his heed and a spere in his ryght hande/ and coueryd wyth his sheld/ a swerde and a mace on his lyft syde/ Cladd wyth an hawberk and plates to fore his breste/ legge harnoys on his legges/ Spores on his heelis on his handes his gauntelettes/ his hors well broken and taught and apte to bataylle and couerid with his armes/ whan the knyghtes ben maad they ben bayned or bathed/ that is the signe that they shold lede a newe lyf and newe maners/ also they wake alle the nyght in prayers and orysons vnto god that he wylle gyue hem grace that they may gete that thynge that they may not gete by nature/ The kynge or prynce gyrdeth a boute them a swerde in signe/ that they shold abyde and kepe hym of whom they take theyr dispenses and dignyte. [127] Known in the circles of clerics, students, and merchants, chess entered into the popular culture of the Middle Ages. An example is the 209th song of Carmina Burana from the 13th century, which starts with the names of chess pieces, Roch, pedites, regina... [128] The game of chess, at times, has been discouraged by various religious authorities in Middle Ages: Jewish, [129] Catholic and Orthodox . [130] Some Muslim authorities prohibited it even recently, for example Ruhollah Khomeini in 1979 and Abdul-Aziz ash-Sheikh even later. [131] During the Age of Enlightenment , chess was viewed as a means of self-improvement. Benjamin Franklin , in his article " The Morals of Chess " (1750), wrote: The Game of Chess is not merely an idle amusement; several very valuable qualities of the mind, useful in the course of human life, are to be acquired and strengthened by it, so as to become habits ready on all occasions; for life is a kind of Chess, in which we have often points to gain, and competitors or adversaries to contend with, and in which there is a vast variety of good and ill events, that are, in some degree, the effect of prudence, or the want of it. By playing at Chess then, we may learn: I. Foresight, which looks a little into futurity, and considers the consequences that may attend an action ... II. Circumspection, which surveys the whole Chess-board, or scene of action: – the relation of the several Pieces, and their situations ... III. Caution, not to make our moves too hastily ... [132] Through the Looking-Glass : the Red King is snoring. Illustration by Sir John Tenniel . Chess was occasionally criticized in the 19th century as a waste of time. [133] [134] Chess is taught to children in schools around the world today. Many schools host chess clubs, and there are many scholastic tournaments specifically for children. Tournaments are held regularly in many countries, hosted by organizations such as the United States Chess Federation and the National Scholastic Chess Foundation. [135] Chess is many times depicted in the arts ; significant works where chess plays a key role range from Thomas Middleton's A Game at Chess to Through the Looking-Glass by Lewis Carroll, to Vladimir Nabokov's The Defense , to The Royal Game by Stefan Zweig. Chess has also featured in film classics such as Ingmar Bergman 's The Seventh Seal , Satyajit Ray 's The Chess Players , and Powell and Pressburger 's A Matter of Life and Death . Chess is also present in contemporary popular culture. For example, the characters in Star Trek play a futuristic version of the game called " Federation Tri-Dimensional Chess " [136] and " Wizard's Chess " is played in J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter . [137] Mathematics
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia It has been suggested that Skateboarding trick be merged into this article. ( Discuss ) Proposed since April 2024. "Skateboarder" redirects here. For the magazine, see Skateboarder (magazine) . Skateboarding Since 2020 Skateboarding is an action sport that involves riding and performing tricks using a skateboard , as well as a recreational activity, an art form, an entertainment industry job , and a method of transportation . [1] [2] Originating in the United States, skateboarding has been shaped and influenced by many skateboarders throughout the years. A 2009 report found that the skateboarding market is worth an estimated $4.8 billion in annual revenue, with 11.08 million active skateboarders in the world. [3] In 2016, it was announced that skateboarding would be represented at the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo , for both male and female teams. [4] Since the 1970s, skateparks have been constructed specifically for use by skateboarders, freestyle BMXers , aggressive skaters , and more recently, scooters . [5] However, skateboarding has become controversial in areas in which the activity, although legal, has damaged curbs, stoneworks, steps, benches, plazas, and parks. [1] [6] History 1940s–1960s The first skateboards started with wooden boxes, or boards, with roller skate wheels attached to the bottom. Crate scooters preceded skateboards, having a wooden crate attached to the nose (front of the board), which formed rudimentary handlebars. [7] [8] [9] The boxes turned into planks, similar to the skateboard decks of today. [1] Skateboarding, as it exists today, was probably born sometime in the late 1940s, or early 1950s, [10] when surfers in California wanted something to do when the waves were flat. This was called " sidewalk surfing " – a new wave of surfing on the sidewalk as the sport of surfing became highly popular. No one knows who made the first board; it seems that several people came up with similar ideas at around the same time. The first manufactured skateboards were ordered by a Los Angeles , California surf shop, meant to be used by surfers in their downtime. The shop owner, Bill Richard, made a deal with the Chicago Roller Skate Company [11] to produce sets of skate wheels, which they attached to square wooden boards. Accordingly, skateboarding was originally denoted "sidewalk surfing" and early skaters emulated surfing style and maneuvers, and performed barefoot. [7] [1] [12] By the 1960s a small number of surfing manufacturers in Southern California such as Jack's, Kips', Hobie , Bing's and Makaha started building skateboards that resembled small surfboards, and assembled teams to promote their products. One of the earliest Skateboard exhibitions was sponsored by Makaha's founder, Larry Stevenson , in 1963 and held at the Pier Avenue Junior High School in Hermosa Beach , California. [13] [14] [15] Some of these same teams of skateboarders were also featured on a television show called Surf's Up in 1964, hosted by Stan Richards, that helped promote skateboarding as something new and fun to do. [16] As the popularity of skateboarding began expanding, the first skateboarding magazine, The Quarterly Skateboarder was published in 1964. [1] John Severson , who published the magazine, wrote in his first editorial: Today's skateboarders are founders in this sport—they're pioneers—they are the first. There is no history in Skateboarding—its being made now—by you. The sport is being molded and we believe that doing the right thing now will lead to a bright future for the sport. Already, there are storm clouds on the horizon with opponents of the sport talking about ban and restriction. [17] The magazine only lasted four issues, but resumed publication as Skateboarder in 1975. [17] [18] [19] The first broadcast of an actual skateboarding competition was the 1965 National Skateboarding Championships, which were held in Anaheim , California and aired on ABC's Wide World of Sports . [20] [21] Because skateboarding was a new sport during this time, there were only two original disciplines during competitions: flatland freestyle and slalom downhill racing. [7] Animated cartoons of the time occasionally featured skateboard gags. Two Road Runner cartoons made in 1965, Shot and Bothered and Out and Out Rout , feature Wile E. Coyote riding a skateboard. [22] [23] One of the earliest sponsored skateboarders, Patti McGee , was paid by Hobie and Vita Pak to travel around the country to do skateboarding exhibitions and to demonstrate skateboarding safety tips. McGee made the cover of Life magazine [1] [24] in 1965 and was featured on several popular television programs— The Mike Douglas Show , What's My Line? and The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson —which helped make skateboarding even more popular at the time. [25] [26] [27] Some other well known surfer-style skateboarders of the time were Danny Bearer, Torger Johnson, Bruce Logan, Bill and Mark Richards, Woody Woodward, and Jim Fitzpatrick. The growth of the sport during this period can also be seen in sales figures for Makaha, which quoted $4 million worth of board sales between 1963 and 1965. [28] By 1966 a variety of sources began to claim that skateboarding was dangerous, resulting in shops being reluctant to sell them, and parents being reluctant to buy them. In 1966 sales had dropped significantly [28] and Skateboarder Magazine had stopped publication. The popularity of skateboarding dropped and remained low until the early 1970s. [8] [29] [30] 1970s In the early 1970s, Frank Nasworthy started to develop a skateboard wheel made of polyurethane , calling his company Cadillac Wheels. [8] Prior to this new material, skateboards wheels were metal or "clay" wheels. [1] The improvement in traction and performance was so immense that from the wheel's release in 1972 the popularity of skateboarding started to rise rapidly again, causing companies to invest more in product development. Nasworthy commissioned artist Jim Evans to do a series of paintings promoting Cadillac Wheels, they were featured as ads and posters in the resurrected Skateboarder Magazine, and proved immensely popular in promoting the new style of skateboarding. In the early 1970s skateparks had not been invented yet, so skateboarders would flock and skateboard in such urban places as the Escondido reservoir in San Diego , California. [1] Skateboarding magazine would publish the location and skateboarders made up nicknames for each location such as the Tea Bowl, the Fruit Bowl, Bellagio, the Rabbit Hole, Bird Bath, the Egg Bowl, Upland Pool and the Sewer Slide. Some of the development concepts in the terrain of skateparks were actually taken from the Escondido reservoir. [31] [32] [33] Many companies started to manufacture trucks (axles) specially designed for skateboarding, reached in 1976 by Tracker Trucks. As the equipment became more maneuverable, the decks started to get wider, reaching widths of 10 inches (250 mm) and over, thus giving the skateboarder even more control. [1] A banana board is a skinny, flexible skateboard made of polypropylene with ribs on the underside for structural support. These were very popular during the mid-1970s and were available in a myriad of colors, bright yellow probably being the most memorable, hence the name. In 1975 skateboarding had risen back in popularity enough to have one of the largest skateboarding competitions since the 1960s, the Del Mar National Championships, which is said to have had up to 500 competitors. The competition lasted two days and was sponsored by Bahne Skateboards and Cadillac Wheels. While the main event was won by freestyle spinning skate legend Russ Howell , [34] [35] a local skate team from Santa Monica , California, the Zephyr team, ushered in a new era of surfer style skateboarding during the competition that would have a lasting impact on skateboarding's history. With a team of 12, including skating legends such as Jay Adams , Tony Alva , Peggy Oki and Stacy Peralta , they brought a new progressive style of skateboarding to the event, based on the style of Hawaiian surfers Larry Bertlemann , Buttons Kaluhiokalani and Mark Liddell. [36] Craig Stecyk , a photo journalist for Skateboarder Magazine, wrote about and photographed the team, along with Glen E. Friedman , and shortly afterwards ran a series on the team called the Dogtown articles, which eventually immortalized the Zephyr skateboard team. The team became known as the Z-Boys and would go on to become one of the most influential teams in skateboarding's history. [31] [37] [38] Soon, skateboarding contests for cash and prizes, using a professional tier system, began to be held throughout California, such as the California Free Former World Professional Skateboard Championships, which featured freestyle and slalom competitions. [39] A precursor to the extreme sport of street luge , that was sanctioned by the United States Skateboarding Association (USSA), also took place during the 1970s in Signal Hill , California. The competition was called "The Signal Hill Skateboarding Speed Run", with several competitors earning entries into the Guinness Book of World Records , at the time clocking speeds of over 50 mph (80 km/h) on a skateboard. Due to technology and safety concerns at the time, when many competitors crashed during their runs, the sport did not gain popularity or support during this time. [40] [41] In March 1976, Skateboard City skatepark in Port Orange , Florida and Carlsbad Skatepark in San Diego County , California would be the first two large size US skateparks to be opened to the public, just a week apart. [1] They were the first of some 200 skateparks that would be built through 1982. This was due in part to articles that were running in the investment journals at the time, stating that skateparks were a good investment. [7] [31] [42] Notable skateboarders from the 1970s also include Ty Page , Tom Inouye, Laura Thornhill, Ellen O'Neal, Kim Cespedes, Bob Biniak, Jana Payne, Waldo Autry, Robin Logan, Bobby Piercy, Russ Howell, Ellen Berryman, Shogo Kubo , Desiree Von Essen, Henry Hester, Robin Alaway, Paul Hackett, Michelle Matta, Bruce Logan, Steve Cathey, Edie Robertson, Mike Weed, David Hackett, Gregg Ayres, Darren Ho, and Tom Sims [ citation needed ]. Manufacturers started to experiment with more exotic composites and metals, like fiberglass and aluminum , but the common skateboards were made of maple plywood. [1] The skateboarders took advantage of the improved handling of their skateboards and started inventing new tricks. Skateboarders, most notably Ty Page, Bruce Logan, Bobby Piercy, Kevin Reed, and the Z-Boys started to skate the vertical walls of swimming pools that were left empty in the 1976 California drought . This started the " vert " trend in skateboarding. With increased control, vert skaters could skate faster and perform more dangerous tricks, such as slash grinds and frontside/backside airs. This caused liability concerns and increased insurance costs to skatepark owners, and the development (first by Norcon , then more successfully by Rector) of improved knee pads that had a hard sliding cap and strong strapping proved to be too-little-too-late. During this era, the "freestyle" movement in skateboarding began to splinter off and develop into a much more specialized discipline, characterized by the development of a wide assortment of flat-ground tricks. As a result of the "vert" skating movement, skate parks had to contend with high liability costs that led to many park closures. In response, vert skaters started making their own ramps, while freestyle skaters continued to evolve their flatland style. Thus, by the beginning of the 1980s, skateboarding had once again declined in popularity. [29] 1980s This period was fueled by skateboard companies that were run by skateboarders. The focus was initially on vert ramp skateboarding. The invention of the no-hands aerial (later known as the ollie ) by Alan Gelfand in Florida in 1976, [43] and the almost parallel development of the grabbed aerial by George Orton and Tony Alva in California, made it possible for skaters to perform airs on vertical ramps. While this wave of skateboarding was sparked by commercialized vert ramp skating, a majority of people who skateboarded during this period did not ride vert ramps. As most people could not afford to build vert ramps, or did not have access to nearby ramps, street skating increased in popularity. Freestyle skating remained healthy throughout this period, with pioneers such as Rodney Mullen inventing many of the basic tricks that would become the foundation of modern street skating, such as the "Impossible" and the " kickflip ". [1] The influence that freestyle exerted upon street skating became apparent during the mid-1980s; however, street skating was still performed on wide vert boards with short noses, slide rails, and large soft wheels. In response to the tensions created by this confluence of skateboarding "genres", a rapid evolution occurred in the late 1980s to accommodate the street skater. Since few skateparks were available to skaters at this time, street skating pushed skaters to seek out shopping centers and public and private property as their "spot" to skate. (Public opposition, in which businesses, governments, and property owners have banned skateboarding on properties under their jurisdiction or ownership, would progressively intensify over the following decades.) [1] [44] [45] By 1992, only a small fraction of skateboarders continuing to take part in a highly technical version of street skating, combined with the decline of vert skating, produced a sport that lacked the mainstream appeal to attract new skaters. During this period, numerous skateboarders—as well as companies in the industry—paid tribute to the scenes of Marty McFly skateboarding in the film Back to the Future for its influence in this regard. Examples can be seen in promotional material, in interviews in which professional skateboarders cite the film as an initiation into the action sport, and in the public's recognition of the film's influence. [46] [47] Tony Hawk has stated that “there are plenty of legendary pros that I know of that started skating because they saw that [film].” [48] 1990s Skateboarding during the 1990s became dominated by street skateboarding . [1] Most boards are about 7+1⁄4 to 8 inches (180 to 200 mm) wide and 30 to 32 inches (760 to 810 mm) long. The wheels are made of an extremely hard polyurethane , with hardness ( durometer ) approximately 99A. The wheel sizes are relatively small so that the boards are lighter, and the wheels' inertia is overcome quicker, thus making tricks more manageable. Board styles have changed dramatically since the 1970s but have remained mostly alike since the mid-1990s. The contemporary shape of the skateboard is derived from the freestyle boards of the 1980s with a largely symmetrical shape and relatively narrow width. This form had become standard by the mid-1990s. [49] 2000s Skateboarder in Manhattan, New York (2008) By 2001 skateboarding had gained so much popularity that more American people under the age of 18 rode skateboards (10.6 million) than played baseball (8.2 million), although traditional organized team sports still dominated youth programs overall. [50] Skateboarding and skateparks began to be viewed and used in a variety of new ways to complement academic lessons in schools, including new non-traditional physical education skateboarding programs, like Skatepass [1] [51] and Skateistan , [52] to encourage youth to have better attendance, self-discipline and confidence. [53] [54] [55] This was also based on the healthy physical opportunities skateboarding was understood to bring participants for muscle & bone strengthening and balance, as well as the positive impacts it can have on youth in teaching them mutual respect, social networking, artistic expression and an appreciation of the environment. [1] [56] [57] [58] [59] In 2003 Go Skateboarding Day was founded in southern California by the International Association of Skateboard Companies (IASC) [60] to promote skateboarding throughout the world. It is celebrated annually on June 21 "to define skateboarding as the rebellious, creative celebration of independence it continues to be." [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] According to market research firm American Sports Data the number of skateboarders worldwide increased by more than 60 percent between 1999 and 2002—from 7.8 million to 12.5 million. [66] Many cities also began implementing recreation plans and statutes during this time period, as part of their vision for local parks and communities to make public lands more available, in particular, for skateboarding, inviting skateboarders to come in off of the city streets and into organized skateboarding activity areas. [1] By 2006 there were over 2,400 skateparks worldwide and the design of skateparks themselves had made a transition, as skaters turned designers. [50] [67] [68] [69] [70] Many new places to skateboard designed specifically for street skaters, such as the Buszy in Milton Keynes , UK, and the Safe Spot Skate Spot program, first initiated by professional skateboarder Rob Dyrdek throughout many cities, allowed for the creation of smaller alternative safe skate plazas to be built at a lower cost. [1] [71] One of the largest locations ever built to skateboard in the world, SMP Skatepark in China, at 12,000 square meters in size, was built complete with a 5,000-seat stadium. [1] [72] In 2009 Skatelab opened the Skateboarding Hall of Fame & Skateboard Museum. Nominees are chosen by the IASC. [73] [74] 2010s–present Downhill skateboarding (video) (2012) Efforts have been taken to improve recognition of the cultural heritage as well as the positive effects of encouraging skateboarding within designated spaces. In 2015, the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C. , hosted an event at which skateboarders accompanied by music did tricks on a ramp constructed for a festival of American culture . [75] The event was the climax of a ten-day project that transformed a federal institution formerly off-limits to the skateboarding community into a platform for that community to show its relevance through shared cultural action in a cultural common space. By raising £790,000, the Long Live Southbank [76] initiative managed in 2017 to curb the destruction of a forty year old spot in London, the Southbank Undercroft , a popular skate park, due to urban planning, a salvaging operation whose effect extends beyond skateboarding. [1] The presence of a designated skating area within this public space keeps the space under nearly constant watch and drives homeless people away, increasing the feeling of safety in and near the space. [77] The activity attracts artists such as photographers and film makers, as well as a significant number of tourists, which in turn drives economic activity in the neighborhood. [78] Recently, barefoot skating has been experiencing a revival. Many skaters ride barefoot, particularly in summer and in warmer countries, such as South Africa , Australia , Spain and South America . The plastic penny board is intended to be ridden barefoot, as is the surfboard-inspired hamboard . Electric skateboards became popular during the 2010s, as did self-balancing unicycles in a board format. The sport of skateboarding made its Olympics debut at the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo , with both men's and women's events. Competitions took place during July and August 2021 in two disciplines: street and park (see Skateboarding at the 2020 Summer Olympics ). [79] Skateboarder at Skateistan in Kabul , Afghanistan (2011) A skateboarder in mid flight performing a trick in Australia (2012) Nicholas Deconie frontside five-0 at Millennium Skate Park in Brooklyn, New York (2019) Skaters await their turn during the best trick contest at the Coleman Playground Skatepark in Manhattan, New York (2019). A skateboarder at Venice Beach (2022) Trick skating Main article: Skateboarding trick A skater performing a flip trick With the evolution of skateparks and ramp skating, the skateboard began to change. Early skate tricks had consisted mainly of two-dimensional freestyle maneuveres like riding on only two wheels ("wheelie" or "manual"), spinning only on the back wheels (a "pivot"), high jumping over a bar and landing on the board again, also known as a "hippie jump", long jumping from one board to another, (often over small barrels or fearless teenagers), or slalom. Another popular trick was the Bertlemann slide , named after Larry Bertelemann's surfing maneuveres. In 1976, skateboarding was transformed by the invention of the ollie by Alan "Ollie" Gelfand . [1] It remained largely a unique Florida trick until the summer of 1978, when Gelfand made his first visit to California. Gelfand and his revolutionary maneuvers caught the attention of the West Coast skaters and the media where it began to spread worldwide. The ollie was adapted to flat ground by Rodney Mullen in 1982. Mullen also invented the "Magic Flip", which was later renamed the kickflip , as well as many other tricks including the 360 Kickflip , which is a 360 pop shove-it and a kickflip in the same motion. The flat ground ollie forms the basis of many street skating tricks, allowing skateboarders to perform tricks in mid-air without any more equipment than the skateboard itself. A recent development in the world of trick skating is the 1080 , which was first ever landed by Tom Schaar in 2012. [80] [81] Culture Tony Hawk speaking about the importance of skateboarding in people's lives at the California Hall of Fame induction ceremony in 2019 (video) Film Skateboarding was popularized by the 1986 skateboarding cult classic Thrashin' . Directed by David Winters and starring Josh Brolin , it features appearances from many famous skaters such as Tony Alva , Tony Hawk , Christian Hosoi and Steve Caballero . Thrashin' also had a direct impact on Lords of Dogtown , as Catherine Hardwicke , who directed Lords of Dogtown, was hired by Winters to work on Thrashin' as a production designer where she met, worked with and befriended many famous skaters including the real Alva, Hawk, Hosoi and Caballero. [1] Skateboarding was, at first, tied to the culture of surfing . As skateboarding spread across the United States to places unfamiliar with surfing or surfer culture, it developed an image of its own. For example, the classic film short Video Days (1991) portrayed skateboarders as "reckless rebels". [1] California duo Jan and Dean recorded the song " Sidewalk Surfin' " in 1964, which is the Beach Boys song " Catch a Wave " with new lyrics associated with skateboarding instead of surfing. Skate parks Certain cities still oppose the building of skate parks in their neighborhoods, for fear of increased crime and drugs in the area. The rift between the old image of skateboarding and a newer one is quite visible: magazines such as Thrasher portray skateboarding as dirty, rebellious, and still firmly tied to punk , while other publications, Transworld Skateboarding as an example, paint a more diverse and controlled picture of skateboarding. As more professional skaters use hip hop , reggae , or hard rock music accompaniment in their videos, many urban youths, hip hop fans, reggae fans, and hard rock fans are also drawn to skateboarding, further diluting the sport's punk image. Group spirit supposedly influences the members of this community. In presentations of this sort, showcasing of criminal tendencies is absent, and no attempt is made to tie extreme sports to any kind of illegal activity. Female based skateboarding groups also exist, such as Brujas which is based in New York City . Many women use their participation in skate crews to perform an alternative form of femininity. [1] [82] These female skate crews offer a safe haven for women and girls in cities, where they can skate and bond without male expectations or competition. Video The increasing availability of technology is apparent within the skateboarding community. Many skateboarders record and edit videos of themselves and friends skateboarding. However, part of this culture is to not merely replicate but to innovate; emphasis is placed on finding new places and landing new tricks. Video games Skateboarding video games have also become very popular in skateboarding culture. [83] Some of the most popular are the Tony Hawk series and Skate series for various consoles (including hand-held) and personal computer. [84] [85] Skate shoe Further information: Skate shoe Whilst early skateboarders generally rode barefoot , preferring direct foot-to-board contact, and some skaters continue to do so, one of the early leading trends associated with the sub-culture of skateboarding itself, was the sticky-soled slip-on skate shoe , most popularized by Sean Penn 's skateboarding character from the film Fast Times at Ridgemont High . [1] [9] Because early skateboarders were actually surfers trying to emulate the sport of surfing, at the time when skateboards first came out on the market, many skateboarded barefoot. But skaters often lacked traction, which led to foot injuries. [30] This necessitated the need for a shoe that was specifically designed and marketed for skateboarding, such as the Randy "720", manufactured by the Randolph Rubber Company, and Vans sneakers, which eventually became cultural iconic signifiers for skateboarders during the 1970s and '80s as skateboarding became more widespread. [9] [86] [87] [88] [89] [90] While the skate shoes design afforded better connection and traction with the deck, skaterboarders themselves could often be identified when wearing the shoes, with Tony Hawk once saying, "If you were wearing Vans shoes in 86, you were a skateboarder". [31] Because of its connection with skateboarding, Vans financed the legendary skateboarding documentary Dogtown and Z-Boys and was the first sneaker company to endorse a professional skateboarder Stacy Peralta . Vans has a long history of being a major sponsor of many of skateboarding's competitions and events throughout skateboarding's history as well, including the Vans Warped Tour and the Vans Triple Crown Series. [1] [9] [91] [92] [93] [94] [95] As it eventually became more apparent that skateboarding had a particular identity with a style of shoe, other brands of shoe companies began to specifically design skate shoes for functionality and style to further enhance the experience and culture of skateboarding including such brands as; Converse , Nike , DC Shoes , Globe , Adidas , Zoo York and World Industries . Many professional skateboarders are designed a pro-model skate shoe, with their name on it, once they have received a skateboarding sponsorship after becoming notable skateboarders. Some shoe companies involved with skateboarding, like Sole Technology , an American footwear company that makes the Etnies skate shoe brand, further distinguish themselves in the market by collaborating with local cities to open public skateparks , such as the etnies Skatepark in Lake Forest , California. [93] [94] [96] [97] Skateboard deck Further information: Skateboard deck Individuality and a self-expressed casual style have always been cultural values for skateboarders, as uniforms and jerseys are not typically worn. [98] [99] This type of personal style for skateboarders is often reflected in the graphical designs illustrated on the bottom of the deck of skateboards, since its initial conception in the mid-seventies, when Wes Humpston and Jim Muri first began doing design work for Dogtown Skateboards out of their garage by hand, creating the very first iconic skateboard-deck art with the design of the "Dogtown Cross". [100] [101] [102] Prior to the mid-seventies many early skateboards were originally based upon the concept of “Sidewalk Surfing” and were tied to the surf culture , skateboards were surfboard like in appearance with little to no graphics located under the bottom of the skateboard-deck. [1] Some of the early manufactured skateboards such as "Roller Derby", the "Duraflex Surfer" and the "Banana board" are characteristic. Some skateboards during that time were manufactured with company logo's or stickers across the top of the deck of the skateboard, as griptape was not initially used for construction. But as skateboarding progressed and evolved, and as artists began to design and add influence to the artwork of skateboards, designs and themes began to change. [103] There were several artistic skateboarding pioneers that had an influence on the culture of skateboarding during the 1980s, that transformed skateboard-deck art like Jim Phillips, whose edgy comic-book style "Screaming Hand", not only became the main logo for Santa Cruz Skateboards , but eventually transcended into tattoos of the same image for thousands of people and vinyl collectible figurines over the years. [104] [105] [106] Artist Vernon Courtlandt Johnson is said to have used his artwork of skeletons and skulls, for Powell Peralta , during the same time that the music genres of punk rock and new wave music were beginning to mesh with the culture of skateboarding. [9] [107] [108] Some other notable skateboard artists that made contributions to the culture of skateboarding also include Andy Jenkins, Todd Bratrud , Neil Blender , Marc McKee , Tod Swank , Mark Gonzales , Lance Mountain , Natas Kaupas and Jim Evans . [109] [110] Over the years skateboard-deck art has continued to influence and expand the culture of skateboarding, as many people began collecting skateboards based on their artistic value and nostalgia. Productions of limited editions with particular designs and types of collectible prints that can be hung on the wall, have been created by such famous artists as Andy Warhol and Keith Haring . [1] Most professional skateboarders today have their own signature skateboard decks, with their favorite artistic designs printed on them using computer graphics . [111] [112] High value and collectible skateboards In January 2019, Sotheby's in New York auctioned [113] the full set of the 248 skateboard deck designs ever sold by Supreme , collected by Ryan Fuller. The full set sold for $800,000 to 17 year old Carson Guo from Vancouver [114] who plans to exhibit them in a local gallery. New York based SHUT Skateboards had a goldplated skateboard for sale at $15,000 in 2014, then the most expensive skateboard in the world. [115] In 2019, artist Adrian Wilson created the SUPREME Mundi, a cross between an artist palette and a skateboard as a commentary on the record bids at auction of the Supreme decks and the restored Salvatore Mundi which was sold by a New York art gallery for $20,000 [116] Safety Skateboards, along with other small-wheeled transportation such as in-line skates and scooters, suffer a safety problem: riders may easily be thrown from small cracks and outcroppings in pavement, especially where the cracks run across the direction of travel. Hitting such an irregularity is the major cause of falls and injuries. [117] The risk may be reduced at higher travel speeds. Severe injuries are relatively rare. [118] Commonly, a skateboarder who falls suffers from scrapes , cuts , bruises , and sprains . [118] Among injuries reported to a hospital, about half involve broken bones, usually the long bones in the leg or arm. [117] One third of skateboarders with reported injuries are very new to the sport, having started skating within one week of the injury. [117] Although less common, involving 3.5–9 percent of reported injuries, traumatic head injuries and death are possible severe outcomes. [117] Skating as a form of transportation exposes the skateboarder to the dangers of other traffic. Skateboarders on the street may be hit by other vehicles or may fall into vehicular traffic. Skateboarders also occasionally pose a risk to other pedestrians and traffic. If the skateboarder falls, the skateboard may roll or fly into another person. A skateboarder who collides with a person who is walking or biking may injure or, rarely, kill that person. [119] Many jurisdictions require skateboarders to wear bicycle helmets to reduce the risk of head injuries and death. Other protective gear, such as wrist guards , also reduce injury. Some medical researchers have proposed restricting skateboarding to designated, specially designed areas, to reduce the number and severity of injuries, and to eliminate injuries caused by motor vehicles or to other pedestrians. [117] The use, ownership and sale of skateboards were forbidden in Norway from 1978 to 1989 because of the high number of injuries caused by boards. The ban led skateboarders to construct ramps in the forest and other secluded areas to avoid the police. There was, however, one legal skatepark in the country in Frogner Park in Oslo. [120] [121] [122] Other uses and styles For styles of skateboarding, see Skateboarding styles . Transportation The use of skateboards solely as a form of transportation is often associated with the longboard . [123] Depending on local laws, using skateboards as a form of transportation outside residential areas may or may not be legal. [124] Backers cite portability, exercise, and environmental friendliness as some of the benefits of skateboarding as an alternative to automobiles. Military Soldier carrying a skateboard during a military exercise in Oakland, California (March 1999) The United States Marine Corps tested the usefulness of commercial off-the-shelf skateboards during urban combat military exercises in the late 1990s in a program called Urban Warrior '99. Their special purpose was "for maneuvering inside buildings in order to detect tripwires and sniper fire". [125] [126] Trampboarding Trampboarding is a variant of skateboarding that uses a board without the trucks and the wheels on a trampoline . Using the bounce of the trampoline gives height to perform tricks, whereas in skateboarding one needs to make the height by performing an ollie . Trampboarding is seen on YouTube in numerous videos. [127] Swing boarding Swing boarding is the activity where a skateboard deck is suspended from a pivot point above the rider which allows the rider to swing about that pivot point. The board swings in an arc which is a similar movement to riding a half pipe. The incorporation of a harness and frame allows the rider to perform turns and spins all while flying through the air. Controversy Skateboarding damages urban terrain features such as curbs, benches, and ledges when skateboarders perform " grinds " and other tricks on these surfaces. [128] Private industry has responded to this problem by using skate deterrent devices , such as the Skatestopper , in efforts to prevent further damage and to reduce skateboarding on these surfaces. [128] The enactment of ordinances and the posting of signs stating "Skateboarding is not allowed" have also become common methods to discourage skateboarding in public areas in many cities, to protect pedestrians and property. [1] [129] In the area of street skating, tickets and arrest from police for trespassing and vandalism are not uncommon. [129] Skateboarding has become an important problem in Freedom Plaza , a National Park within the Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site in Washington, D.C. [6] [130] The Plaza has become a popular location for skateboarding, although the activity is illegal and has resulted in police actions. [6] [131] The Plaza contains copies of portions of Pierre (Peter) Charles L'Enfant's 1791 plan for the nation's capital city that have been inscribed in the park's raised marble surface. [130] A 2016 National Park Service management plan for the Historic Site states that skateboarding has damaged stonework, sculptures, walls, benches, steps, and other surfaces in some areas of the Plaza. [6] The management plan further states that skateboarding presents a persistent law enforcement and management challenge, as popular websites advertise the Plaza's attractiveness for the activity. [6] The plan notes that vandals have removed "No Skateboarding" signs and recommends the replacement of those signs. [6] A professional skateboarder promoted on Facebook the use of governmental sites for the prohibited activity during the 2013 federal government shutdown in the United States. [132] See also
Banzai Pipeline ; Shark Island ; Pipes, Encinitas Table 1 shows a relationship of smaller peel angles correlating with a higher skill level of the surfer. Smaller wave peel angles increase the velocities of waves. A surfer must know how to react and paddle quickly to match the speed of the wave to catch it. Therefore, more experience is required to catch low peel angle waves. More experienced surfers can handle longer section lengths, increased velocities, and higher wave heights. [49] Different locations offer different types of surfing conditions for each skill level. Surf breaks[ edit ] A surf break is an area with an obstruction or an object that causes a wave to break. Surf breaks entail multiple scale phenomena. Wave section creation has microscale factors of peel angle and wave breaking intensity. The micro-scale components influence wave height and variations on wave crests. The mesoscale components of surf breaks are the ramp, platform, wedge, or ledge that may be present at a surf break. Macro-scale processes are the global winds that initially produce offshore waves. Types of surf breaks are headlands (point break), beach break, river/estuary entrance bar, reef breaks, and ledge breaks. [49] Headland (point break)[ edit ] A headland or point break interacts with the water by causing refraction around the point or headland. The point absorbs the high-frequency waves and long-period waves persist, which are easier to surf. Examples of locations that have headland or point break-induced surf breaks are Dunedin (New Zealand), Raglan (New Zealand), Malibu (California), Rincon (California), and Kirra (Australia). [49] Beach break[ edit ] A beach break is an area of open coastline where the waves break over a sand-bottom. They are the most common, yet also the most volatile of surf breaks. Wave breaks happen successively at beach breaks, as in there are multiple peaks to surf at a single beach break location. Example locations are Tairua and Aramoana Beach (New Zealand) and the Gold Coast (Australia). [49] A group of surfers surfing a beach break in Juno Beach, Florida . River or estuary entrance bar[ edit ] A river or estuary entrance bar creates waves from the ebb-tidal delta, sediment outflow, and tidal currents. An ideal estuary entrance bar exists in Whangamata Bar, New Zealand. [49] Reef break[ edit ] A reef break is conducive to surfing because large waves consistently break over the reef. The reef is usually made of coral, and because of this, many injuries occur while surfing reef breaks. However, the waves that are produced by reef breaks are some of the best in the world. Famous reef breaks are present in Padang Padang (Indonesia), Pipeline (Hawaii), Uluwatu (Bali), and Teahupo'o (Tahiti). [49] [52] Ledge break[ edit ] A ledge break is formed by steep rocks ledges that make intense waves because the waves travel through deeper water then abruptly reach shallower water at the ledge. Shark Island, Australia is a location with a ledge break. Ledge breaks create difficult surfing conditions, sometimes only allowing body surfing as the only feasible way to confront the waves. [49] Jetties and their impacts on wave formation in the surf zone[ edit ] This article needs attention from an expert in Limnology and Oceanography. The specific problem is: Contents of this section are incomprehensible. Source is paywalled. WikiProject Limnology and Oceanography may be able to help recruit an expert. (February 2021) Jetties are added to bodies of water to regulate erosion, preserve navigation channels, and make harbors. Jetties are classified into four different types and have two main controlling variables: the type of delta[ clarification needed ] and the size of the jetty. [53] Type 1 jetty[ edit ] The first classification is a type 1 jetty. This type of jetty is significantly longer than the surf zone width and the waves break at the shore end of the jetty. The effect of a Type 1 jetty is sediment accumulation in a wedge formation on the jetty. These waves are large and increase in size as they pass over the sediment wedge formation. An example of a Type 1 jetty is Mission Beach, San Diego, California. This 1000-meter jetty was installed in 1950 at the mouth of Mission Bay. The surf waves happen north of the jetty, are longer waves, and are powerful. The bathymetry of the sea bottom in Mission Bay has a wedge shape formation that causes the waves to refract as they become closer to the jetty. [53] The waves converge constructively after they refract and increase the sizes of the waves. Type 2 jetty[ edit ] A type 2 jetty occurs in an ebb-tidal delta, a delta transitioning between high and low tide. This area has shallow water, refraction, and distinctive seabed shapes that create large wave heights. [53] An example of a type 2 jetty is called "The Poles" in Atlantic Beach, Florida. Atlantic Beach is known to have flat waves, with exceptions during major storms. However, "The Poles" has larger than normal waves due to a 500-meter jetty that was installed on the south side of St. Johns. This jetty was built to make a deep channel in the river. It formed a delta at "The Poles". This is a special area because the jetty increases wave size for surfing when comparing pre-conditions and post-conditions of the southern St. Johns River mouth area. [53] The wave size at "The Poles" depends on the direction of the incoming water. When easterly waters (from 55°) interact with the jetty, they create waves larger than southern waters (from 100°). When southern waves (from 100°) move toward "The Poles", one of the waves breaks north of the southern jetty and the other breaks south of the jetty. This does not allow for merging to make larger waves. Easterly waves, from 55°, converge north of the jetty and unite to make bigger waves. [53] Type 3 jetty[ edit ] A type 3 jetty is in an ebb-tidal area with an unchanging seabed that has naturally created waves. Examples of a Type 3 jetty occurs in “Southside” Tamarack, Carlsbad, California. [53] Type 4 jetty[ edit ] A type 4 jetty is one that no longer functions nor traps sediment. The waves are created from reefs in the surf zone. A type 4 jetty can be found in Tamarack, Carlsbad, California. [53] Main article: Rip current Rip currents are fast, narrow currents that are caused by onshore transport within the surf zone and the successive return of the water seaward. [54] [55] The wedge bathymetry makes a convenient and consistent rip current of 5–10 meters that brings the surfers to the “take-off point” then out to the beach. [53] Oceanographers have two theories on rip current formation. The wave interaction model assumes that two edges of waves interact, create differing wave heights, and cause longshore transport of nearshore currents. The Boundary Interaction Model assumes that the topography of the sea bottom causes nearshore circulation and longshore transport; the result of both models is a rip current. [54] Rip currents can be extremely strong and narrow as they extend out of the surf zone into deeper water, reaching speeds from 0.5 m/s (1.6 ft/s) and up to 2.5 m/s (8.2 ft/s), [55] [56] which is faster than any human can swim. The water in the jet is sediment rich, bubble rich, and moves rapidly. [55] The rip head of the rip current has long shore movement. Rip currents are common on beaches with mild slopes that experience sizeable and frequent oceanic swell. [56] On the surfboard[ edit ] A longer surfboard of 300 cm (10 ft) causes more friction with the water; therefore, it will be slower than a smaller and lighter board with a length of 180 cm (6 ft). Longer boards are good for beginners who need help balancing. Smaller boards are good for more experienced surfers who want to have more control and maneuverability. [51] When practicing the sport of surfing, the surfer paddles out past the wave break to wait for a wave. When a surfable wave arrives, the surfer must paddle extremely fast to match the velocity of the wave so the wave can accelerate him or her. [51] When the surfer is at wave speed, the surfer must quickly pop up, stay low, and stay toward the front of the wave to become stable and prevent falling as the wave steepens. The acceleration is less toward the front than toward the back. The physics behind the surfing of the wave involves the horizontal acceleration force (F·sinθ) and the vertical force (F·cosθ=mg). Therefore, the surfer should lean forward to gain speed, and lean on the back foot to brake. Also, to increase the length of the ride of the wave, the surfer should travel parallel to the wave crest. [51] Drowning[ edit ] Surfing, like all water sports , carries the inherent risk of drowning . [57] Although the board assists a surfer in staying buoyant , it can become separated from the user. [58] A leash, attached to the ankle or knee, can keep a board from being swept away, but does not keep a rider on the board or above water. In some cases, possibly including the drowning of professional surfer Mark Foo , a leash can even be a cause of drowning by snagging on a reef or other object and holding the surfer underwater. [59] By keeping the surfboard close to the surfer during a wipeout, a leash also increases the chances that the board may strike the rider, which could knock them unconscious and lead to drowning. A fallen rider's board can become trapped in larger waves, and if the rider is attached by a leash, they can be dragged for long distances underwater. [59] Surfers should be careful to remain in smaller surf until they have acquired the advanced skills and experience necessary to handle bigger waves and more challenging conditions. However, even world-class surfers have drowned in extremely challenging conditions. [60] Collisions[ edit ] A surfer exiting a closeout Under the wrong set of conditions, anything that a surfer's body can come in contact with is a potential hazard, including sand bars , rocks, small ice, reefs, surfboards, and other surfers. [61] Collisions with these objects can sometimes cause injuries such as cuts and scrapes and in rare instances, death. A large number of injuries, up to 66%, [62] are caused by collision with a surfboard (nose or fins). Fins can cause deep lacerations and cuts, [63] as well as bruising. While these injuries can be minor, they can open the skin to infection from the sea; groups like Surfers Against Sewage campaign for cleaner waters to reduce the risk of infections. Local bugs and diseases can be risk factors when surfing around the globe. [64] Falling off a surfboard or colliding with others is commonly referred to as a wipeout. Marine life[ edit ] Sea life can sometimes cause injuries ( Bethany Hamilton ) and even fatalities . Animals such as sharks , [65] stingrays , Weever fish , seals and jellyfish can sometimes present a danger. [66] Warmer-water surfers often do the "stingray shuffle" as they walk out through the shallows, shuffling their feet in the sand to scare away stingrays that may be resting on the bottom. [67] Rip currents[ edit ] Rip current warning sign Rip currents are water channels that flow away from the shore. Under the wrong circumstances these currents can endanger both experienced and inexperienced surfers. Since a rip current appears to be an area of flat water, tired or inexperienced swimmers or surfers may enter one and be carried out beyond the breaking waves. Although many rip currents are much smaller, the largest rip currents have a width of 12–15 m (40–50 ft). The flow of water moving out towards the sea in a rip will be stronger than most swimmers, making swimming back to shore difficult, however, by paddling parallel to the shore, a surfer can easily exit a rip current. Alternatively, some surfers actually ride on a rip current because it is a fast and effortless way to get out beyond the zone of breaking waves. [68] Seabed[ edit ] The seabed can pose a risk for surfers. If a surfer falls while riding a wave, the wave tosses and tumbles the surfer around, often in a downwards direction. At reef breaks and beach breaks, surfers have been seriously injured and even killed, because of a violent collision with the sea bed, the water above which can sometimes be very shallow, especially at beach breaks or reef breaks during low tide. Cyclops, Western Australia , for example, is one of the biggest and thickest reef breaks in the world, with waves measuring up to 10 m (33 ft) high, but the reef below is only about 2 m (7 ft) below the surface of the water. Microorganisms[ edit ] A January 2018 study by the University of Exeter called the "Beach Bum Survey" found surfers and bodyboarders to be three times as likely as non-surfers to harbor antibiotic-resistant E. coli and four times as likely to harbor other bacteria capable of easily becoming antibiotic resistant. The researchers attributed this to the fact that surfers swallow roughly ten times as much seawater as swimmers. [69] [70] Man wearing protective ear plugs Surfers sometimes use ear protection such as ear plugs to avoid surfer's ear , inflammation of the ear or other damage. Surfer's ear is where the bone near the ear canal grows after repeated exposure to cold water, making the ear canal narrower. The narrowed canal makes it harder for water to drain from the ear. This can result in pain, infection and sometimes ringing of the ear . Ear plugs designed for surfers, swimmers and other water athletes are primarily made to keep water out of the ear, thereby letting a protective pocket of air stay inside the ear canal. They can also block cold air, dirt and bacteria. Many designs are made to let sound through, and either float and/or have a leash in case the plug accidentally gets bumped out. Surf rash[ edit ] Surf rash appears in many different ways on the skin, commonly as a painful red bumpy patch located on the surfer's chest or inner legs. A rash guard will lessen the incidence of surf rash caused by abrasion or sunburn . Healing ointments such as petroleum jelly can be used to treat irritated skin. [71] Spinal cord[ edit ] Surfer's myelopathy is a rare spinal cord injury causing paralysis of the lower extremities, caused by hyperextension of the back. This is due to one of the main blood vessels of the spine becoming kinked, depriving the spinal cord of oxygen. In some cases the paralysis is permanent. Although any activity where the back is arched can cause this condition (i.e. yoga , pilates , etc.), this rare phenomenon has most often been seen in those surfing for the first time. According to DPT Sergio Florian, some recommendations for preventing myelopathy is proper warm up, limiting the session length and sitting on the board while waiting for waves, rather than lying. [72] Surfers and surf culture[ edit ] The Shaka sign Surfers represent a diverse culture based on riding the waves. Some people practice surfing as a recreational activity, while others make it the central focus of their lives. Surfing culture in the US is most dominant in Hawaii and California , because these two states offer the best surfing conditions. However, waves can be found wherever there is coastline, and a tight-knit yet far-reaching subculture of surfers has emerged throughout America. Some historical markers of the culture included the woodie , the station wagon used to carry surfers' boards, as well as boardshorts , the long swim shorts typically worn while surfing. Surfers also wear wetsuits in colder regions and when the seasons cool the air and water. During the 1960s, as surfing caught on in California, its popularity spread through American pop culture. Several teen movies, starting with the Gidget series in 1959, transformed surfing into a dream life for American youth. Later movies, including Beach Party (1963), Ride the Wild Surf (1964), and Beach Blanket Bingo (1965) promoted the California dream of sun and surf.  Surf culture also fueled the early records of the Beach Boys . The sport is also a significant part of Australia 's eastern coast sub-cultural life, [73] especially in New South Wales , where the weather and water conditions are most favourable for surfing. The sport of surfing now represents a multibillion-dollar industry, especially in clothing and fashion markets. Founded in 1964, the International Surfing Association (ISA) is the oldest foundation associated with surfing formed to better improve surfing and recognized by the International Olympic Committee as the leading authority on surfing. National and international surf competitions began in 1964. In addition, The World Surf League (WSL) was established in 1976 and promotes various championship tours, hosting top competitors in some of the best surf spots around the globe. A small number of people make a career out of surfing by receiving corporate sponsorships and performing for photographers and videographers in far-flung destinations; they are typically referred to as freesurfers. Sixty-six surfers on a 13 m (42 ft) long surfboard set a record in Huntington Beach, California for most people on a surfboard at one time.[ citation needed ] Dale Webster consecutively surfed for 14,641 days, making it his main life focus.[ citation needed ] When the waves were flat, surfers persevered with sidewalk surfing, which is now called skateboarding . Sidewalk surfing has a similar feel to surfing and requires only a paved road or sidewalk. To create the feel of the wave, surfers even sneaked into empty backyard swimming pools to ride in, known as pool skating. Eventually, surfing made its way to the slopes with the invention of the Snurfer , later credited as the first snowboard. Many other board sports have been invented over the years, but all can trace their heritage back to surfing.[ citation needed ] Many surfers claim to have a spiritual connection with the ocean, describing surfing, the surfing experience, both in and out of the water, as a type of spiritual experience or a religion. [74]
Toggle the table of contents Mountain biking From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bicycle sport Open to debate. Modern era began in the late 1970s Characteristics Separate men's & women's championship although no restrictions on women competing against men. Presence Since 1996 Mountain biking is a sport of riding bicycles off-road, often over rough terrain, usually using specially designed mountain bikes . Mountain bikes share similarities with other bikes but incorporate features designed to enhance durability and performance in rough terrain, such as air or coil-sprung shocks used as suspension, larger and wider wheels and tires, stronger frame materials, and mechanically or hydraulically actuated disc brakes. Mountain biking can generally be broken down into distinct categories: cross country , trail , all mountain, enduro , downhill and freeride . [1] About[ edit ] This sport requires endurance, core and back strength, balance, bike handling skills, and self-reliance. Advanced riders pursue both steep technical descents and high-incline climbs. In the case of freeride, downhill, and dirt jumping, aerial maneuvers are performed off both natural features and specially constructed jumps and ramps. [2] Mountain bikers ride on off-road trails such as singletrack , back-country roads, wider bike park trails, fire roads , and some advanced trails are designed with jumps, berms, and drop-offs to add excitement to the trail.  Riders with enduro and downhill bikes will often visit ski resorts that stay open in the summer to ride downhill-specific trails, using the ski lifts to return to the top with their bikes. Because riders are often far from civilization, there is a strong element of self-reliance in the sport. Riders learn to repair broken bikes and flat tires to avoid being stranded. Many riders carry a backpack, including water, food, tools for trailside repairs, and a first aid kit in case of injury. Group rides are common, especially on longer treks. Mountain bike orienteering adds the skill of map navigation to mountain biking. US 25th Infantry Bicycle Corps, 1897 A cross-country mountain biker climbs on an unpaved track A mountain bike skills track in Wales Mountain bike touring in high Alps Late 1800s[ edit ] One of the first examples of bicycles modified specifically for off-road use is the expedition of Buffalo Soldiers from Missoula, Montana , to Yellowstone in August 1896. [5] [6] 1900s–1960s[ edit ] Bicycles were ridden off-road by road racing cyclists who used cyclocross as a means of keeping fit during the winter. [6] Cyclo-cross eventually became a sport in its own right in the 1940s, with the first world championship taking place in 1950. [6] The Rough Stuff Fellowship was established in 1955 by off-road cyclists in the United Kingdom. [7] In Oregon in 1966, one Chemeketan club member, D. Gwynn, built a rough terrain trail bicycle. He named it a "mountain bicycle" for its intended place of use. This may be the first use of that name. [8] In England in 1968, Geoff Apps , a motorbike trials rider, began experimenting with off-road bicycle designs. By 1979 he had developed a custom-built lightweight bicycle which was uniquely suited to the wet and muddy off-road conditions found in the south-east of England. They were designed around 2 inch × 650b Nokian snow tires though a 700x47c (28 in.) version was also produced. These were sold under the Cleland Cycles brand until late 1984. Bikes based on the Cleland design were also sold by English Cycles and Highpath Engineering until the early 1990s. [9] 1970s–1980s[ edit ] There were several groups of riders in different areas of the U.S.A. who can make valid claims to playing a part in the birth of the sport. Riders in Marin County, California and Crested Butte, Colorado , tinkered with bikes and adapted them to the rigors of off-road riding. Modified heavy cruiser bicycles , old 1930s and '40s Schwinn bicycles retrofitted with better brakes and fat tires, were used for freewheeling down mountain trails in Marin in the late 1960s to-late 1970s. At the time, the bikes were comparatively primitive with single-speed coaster brakes. The earliest ancestors of modern mountain bikes were based around frames made by Schwinn , Colson and others. The Schwinn Excelsior was the frame of choice due to its geometry. These early bikes were eventually modified with multi-speed gearing, drum or rim brakes, and motocross or BMX-style handlebars, creating "klunkers". The term would also be used as a verb since the term "mountain biking" was not yet in use. The first person known to fit multiple speeds and drum brakes to a klunker is Russ Mahon of Cupertino, California , who used the resulting bike in cyclo-cross racing. [10] Early downhill racing on mountain fire roads , caused lesser branded coaster brakes to burn the grease inside, requiring the riders to "repack" the bearings after each race. The first organized series of downhill races in Fairfax, California, known as "Repack Races" triggered early innovations in mountain bike technology as well as the initial exposure of the sport to a Nation-wide audience through TV media's Evening Magazine . The fire road unofficially named "Repack" still exists and is rideable. The sport originated in California on Marin County 's Mount Tamalpais . [11] It was not until the late 1970s and early 1980s that road bicycle companies started to manufacture mountain bicycles using high-tech lightweight materials. Joe Breeze is normally credited with introducing the first purpose-built mountain bike in 1978. [12] Tom Ritchey then went on to make frames for a company called MountainBikes, a partnership between Gary Fisher , Charlie Kelly and Tom Ritchey . Tom Ritchey, a welder with skills in frame building, also built the original bikes. The company's three partners eventually dissolved their partnership, and the company became Fisher Mountain Bikes, while Tom Ritchey started his own frame shop. The first mountain bikes were basically road bicycle frames (with heavier tubing and different geometry) with a wider frame and fork to allow for a wider tire. The handlebars were also different in that they were a straight, transverse-mounted handlebar, rather than the dropped, curved handlebars that are typically installed on road racing bicycles. Also, some of the parts on early production mountain bicycles were taken from the BMX bicycle. Other contributors were Otis Guy and Keith Bontrager . [13] Tom Ritchey built the first regularly available mountain bike frame, which was accessorized by Gary Fisher and Charlie Kelly and sold by their company called MountainBikes (later changed to Fisher Mountain Bikes, then bought by Trek , still under the name Gary Fisher, currently sold as Trek's "Gary Fisher Collection"). The first two mass-produced mountain bikes were sold in the early 1980s: the Specialized Stumpjumper and Univega Alpina Pro. In 1988, The Great Mountain Biking Video was released, soon followed by others. In 2007, Klunkerz: A Film About Mountain Bikes was released, documenting mountain bike history during the formative period in Northern California. Additionally, a group of mountain bikers called the Laguna Rads formed a club during the mid eighties and began a weekly ride, exploring the uncharted coastal hillsides of Laguna Beach, California. [14] Industry insiders suggest that this was the birth of the freeride movement, as they were cycling up and down hills and mountains where no cycling specific trail network prexisted. The Laguna Rads have also held the longest running downhill race once a year since 1986. At the time, the bicycle industry was not impressed with the mountain bike, regarding mountain biking to be short-term fad. In particular, large manufacturers such as Schwinn and Fuji failed to see the significance of an all-terrain bicycle and the coming boom in 'adventure sports'. Instead, the first mass-produced mountain bikes were pioneered by new companies such as MountainBikes (later, Fisher Mountain Bikes), Ritchey, and Specialized . Specialized was an American startup company that arranged for production of mountain bike frames from factories in Japan and Taiwan. First marketed in 1981, [15] Specialized's mountain bike largely followed Tom Ritchey's frame geometry, but used TiG welding to join the frame tubes instead of fillet-brazing, a process better suited to mass production, and which helped to reduce labor and manufacturing cost. [16] The bikes were configured with 15 gears using derailleurs , a triple chainring , and a cogset with five sprockets. 1990s–2000s[ edit ] Throughout the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century, mountain biking moved from a little-known sport to a mainstream activity. Mountain bikes and mountain bike gear, once only available at specialty shops or via mail order, became available at standard bike stores. By the mid-first decade of the 21st century, even some department stores began selling inexpensive mountain bikes with full-suspension and disc brakes. In the first decade of the 21st century, trends in mountain bikes included the "all-mountain bike", the 29er and the one by drivetrain (though the first mass-produced 1x drivetrain was Sram's XX1 in 2012). "All-mountain bikes" were designed to descend and handle well in rough conditions, while still pedaling efficiently for climbing, and were intended to bridge the gap between cross-country bikes and those built specifically for downhill riding. They are characterized by 4–6 inches (100–150 millimetres) of fork travel. 29er bikes are those using 700c sized rims (as do most road bikes), but wider and suited for tires of two inches (50 mm) width or more; the increased diameter wheel is able to roll over obstacles better and offers a greater tire contact patch , but also results in a longer wheelbase, making the bike less agile, and in less travel space for the suspension. The single-speed is considered a return to simplicity with no drivetrain components or shifters but thus requires a stronger rider. 2000's-2020's[ edit ] Following the growing trend in 29-inch wheels, there have been other trends in the mountain biking community involving tire size. Some riders prefer to have a larger wheel in the front than on the rear, such as on a motorcycle, to increase maneuverability. This is called a mullet bicycle, most common with a 29-inch wheel in the front and a 27.5-inch wheel in the back. Another interesting trend in mountain bikes is outfitting dirt jump or urban bikes with rigid forks. These bikes normally use 4–5″ travel suspension forks. The resulting product is used for the same purposes as the original bike. A commonly cited reason for making the change to a rigid fork is the enhancement of the rider's ability to transmit force to the ground, which is important for performing tricks. In the mid-first decade of the 21st century, an increasing number of mountain bike-oriented resorts opened. Often, they are similar to or in the same complex as a ski resort or they retrofit the concrete steps and platforms of an abandoned factory as an obstacle course, as with Ray's MTB Indoor Park . Mountain bike parks which are operated as summer season activities at ski hills usually include chairlifts that are adapted to bikes, a number of trails of varying difficulty, and bicycle rental facilities. [17] In 2020, due to COVID-19 , mountain bikes saw a surge in popularity in the US, with some vendors reporting that they were sold out of bikes under US$1000. [18] [19] [20] A dual suspension or full suspension mountain bike, 'all-mountain' mountain bike Typical more stout all-mountain bike on rough terrain Main article: Mountain bike Mountain bikes differ from other bikes primarily in that they incorporate features aimed at increasing durability and improving performance in rough terrain. Most modern mountain bikes have some kind of suspension , 26, 27.5 or 29-inch diameter tires, usually between 1.7 and 2.5 inches in width, and a wider, flat or upwardly-rising handlebar that allows a more upright riding position, giving the rider more control. They have a smaller, reinforced frame , usually made of wide tubing. Tires usually have a pronounced tread , and are mounted on rims which are stronger than those used on most non-mountain bicycles. Compared to other bikes, mountain bikes also use hydraulic disc brakes . They also tend to have lower ratio gears to facilitate climbing steep hills and traversing obstacles. Pedals vary from simple platform pedals, where the rider simply places the shoes on top of the pedals, to clipless , where the rider uses a specially equipped shoe with a cleat that engages mechanically into the pedal. Accessories[ edit ] Glasses with little or no difference from those used in other cycling sports, help protect against debris while on the trail. Filtered lenses, whether yellow for cloudy days or shaded for sunny days, protect the eyes from strain. Downhill, freeride, and enduro mountain bikers often use goggles similar to motocross or snowboard goggles in unison with their full face helmets. Shoes generally have gripping soles similar to those of hiking boots for scrambling over un-ridable obstacles, unlike the smooth-bottomed shoes used in road cycling. The shank of mountain bike shoes is generally more flexible than road cycling shoes. Shoes compatible with clipless pedal systems are also frequently used. Clothing is chosen for comfort during physical exertion in the backcountry, and its ability to withstand falls. Road touring clothes are often inappropriate due to their delicate fabrics and construction. Depending on the type of mountain biking, different types of clothes and styles are commonly worn. Cross-country mountain bikers tend to wear lycra shorts and tight road style jerseys due to the need for comfort and efficiency. Downhill riders tend to wear heavier fabric baggy shorts or moto-cross style trousers to protect themselves from falls. All mountain/enduro riders tend to wear light fabric baggy shorts and jerseys as they can be in the saddle for long periods of time. Hydration systems are important for mountain bikers in the backcountry, ranging from simple water bottles to water bags with drinking tubes in lightweight backpacks known as a hydration pack. (e.g. CamelBaks ). GPS systems are sometimes added to the handlebars and are used to monitor progress on trails. Pump to inflate tires. CO2 Inflator with Cartridge to inflate a tube or tubeless tire . Bike tools and extra bike tubes are important, as mountain bikers frequently find themselves miles from help, with flat tires or other mechanical problems that must be handled by the rider. High-power lights based on LED technology, used for mountain biking at night. Some sort of protective case This section is written like a manual or guide . Please help rewrite this section and remove advice or instruction. (February 2016) Mountain bikers in the Port Hills , New Zealand, wearing a variety of protective gear The level of protection worn by individual riders varies greatly and is affected by speed, trail conditions, the weather, and numerous other factors, including personal choice. Protection becomes more important where these factors may be considered to increase the possibility or severity of a crash. A helmet and gloves are usually regarded as sufficient for the majority of non-technical riding. Full-face helmets, goggles and armored suits or jackets are frequently used in downhill mountain biking, where the extra bulk and weight may help mitigate the risks of bigger and more frequent crashes. [21] Helmet . The use of helmets, in one form or another, is almost universal amongst mountain bikers. The three main types are; cross-country, rounded skateboarder style (nicknamed "half shells" or "skate style"), and full-face. Cross-country helmets tend to be light and well ventilated, and more comfortable to wear for long periods, especially while perspiring in hot weather. In XC competitions, most bikers tend to use the usual road-racing style helmets, for their lightweight and aerodynamic qualities. Skateboard helmets are simpler and usually more affordable than other helmet types; provide great coverage of the head and resist minor scrapes and knocks. Unlike road-biking helmets, skateboard helmets typically have a thicker, hard plastic shell which can take multiple impacts before it needs to be replaced. The trade-off for this is that they tend to be much heavier and less ventilated (sweatier), therefore not suitable for endurance-based riding. Full-face helmets (BMX-style) provide the highest level of protection and tend to be stronger than skateboarding style and includes a jaw guard to protect the face. The weight is the main issue with this type, but today they are often reasonably well-ventilated and made of lightweight materials such as carbon fiber. (Full-face helmets with detachable chin-guards are available in some locations, but there are compromises to keep in mind with these designs.) As all helmets should meet minimum standards, SNELL B.95 (American Standard) BS EN 1078:1997 (European Standard), DOT, or "motorized ratings" are making their way into the market. The choice of helmet often comes down to rider preference, the likelihood of crashing, and on what features or properties of a helmet they place emphasis. Helmets are mandatory at competitive events and almost without exception at bike parks, most organizations also stipulate when and where full-face helmets must be used. [22] Body armor and pads, often referred to simply as "armor", are meant to protect limbs and body in the event of a crash. While initially made for and marketed for downhill riders, free-riders, and jump/street riders, body armor has trickled into other areas of mountain biking as trails have become steeper and more technically complex (hence bringing a commensurately higher injury risk). Armor ranges from simple neoprene sleeves for knees, and elbows to complex, articulated combinations of hard plastic shells and padding that cover a whole limb or the entire body. Some companies market body armor jackets and even full-body suits designed to provide greater protection through greater coverage of the body and more secure pad retention. Most upper-body protectors also include a spine protector that comprises plastic or metal reinforced plastic plates, over foam padding, which are joined so that they articulate and move with the back. Some mountain bikers also use BMX-style body armor, such as chest plates, abdomen protectors, and spine plates. New technology has seen an influx of integrated neck protectors that fit securely with full-face helmets, such as the Leatt-Brace . There is a general correlation between increased protection and increased weight/decreased mobility, although different styles balance these factors differently. Different levels of protection are deemed necessary/desirable by different riders in different circumstances. Backpack hydration systems such as Camelbaks , where a water-filled bladder is held close to the spine, are used by some riders for their perceived protective value. More recently, with the increase in enduro racing, backpack hydration systems are also being sold with inbuilt spine protection. However, there is only anecdotal evidence of protection. Gloves can offer increased comfort while riding, by alleviating compression and friction, and can protect against superficial hand injuries. [23] They provide protection in the event of strikes to the back or palm of the hand or when putting the hand out in a fall and can protect the hand, fingers, and knuckles from abrasion on rough surfaces. Many different styles of gloves exist, with various fits, sizes, finger lengths, palm padding, and armor options available. Armoring knuckles and the backs of hands with plastic panels is common in more extreme types of mountain biking. Most of it depends on preference and necessity. First aid kits are often carried by mountain bikers so that they are able to clean, dress cuts, abrasions, and splint broken limbs. Head, brain, and spinal injuries become more likely as speeds increase. All of these can bring permanent changes in quality of life. Experienced mountain bike guides may be trained in dealing with suspected spinal injuries (e.g., immobilizing the victim and keeping the neck straight). Seriously injured people may need to be removed by stretcher , by a motor vehicle suitable for the terrain, or by helicopter. Protective gear cannot provide immunity against injuries. For example, concussions can still occur despite the use of helmets, and spinal injuries can still occur with the use of spinal padding and neck braces. [24] [25] The use of high-tech protective gear can result in a revenge effect, whereupon some cyclists feel safe taking dangerous risks. [26] Because the key determinant of injury risk is kinetic energy , and because kinetic energy increases with the square of the speed, effectively each doubling of speed can quadruple the injury risk.  Similarly, each tripling of speed can be expected to bring a nine-fold increase in risk, and each quadrupling of speed means that a sixteen-fold risk increase must be anticipated. Higher speeds of travel also add danger due to reaction time . Because higher speeds mean that the rider travels further during his/her reaction time, this leaves less travel distance within which to react safely. [27] This, in turn, further multiplies the risk of an injurious crash. In general, although protective gear cannot always prevent the occurrence of injuries, the use of such equipment is appropriate, as is maintaining it in serviceable condition.  Because mountain biking takes place outdoors, ultraviolet radiation from sunlight is present, and UV rays are known to degrade plastic components. [28] Accordingly, and as a rule of thumb, a bicycle helmet should be replaced every five years, or sooner if it appears damaged.  Additionally, if the helmet has been involved in an accident or has otherwise incurred impact-type damage, then it should be replaced promptly, even if it does not appear to be visibly damaged. [29]
e Rock Climbing A rock climber approaches a roof while leading a multi-pitch , traditional route in Custer State Park , United States. Rock climbing is a sport in which participants climb up, across, or down natural rock formations or indoor climbing walls. The goal is to reach the summit of a formation or the endpoint of a usually pre-defined route without falling. Rock climbing is a physically and mentally demanding sport, one that often tests a climber's strength, endurance, agility and balance along with mental control. Knowledge of proper climbing techniques and the use of specialized climbing equipment is crucial for the safe completion of routes. Because of the wide range and variety of rock formations around the world, rock climbing has been separated into several different styles and sub-disciplines, [1] such as scrambling , bouldering , sport climbing , and trad (traditional) climbing. Rock climbing competitions have the objectives of either completing the route in the least amount of attempts, the least amount of time, or attaining the farthest point on an increasingly difficult route. Indoor rock climbing is typically split into three disciplines: bouldering , lead climbing , and top roping . Main article: History of rock climbing Climbing in Germany, circa 1965. In early America, the cliff-dwelling Anasazi in the 12th century are thought to have been excellent climbers. Early European climbers used rock climbing techniques to reach the summits in their mountaineering exploits. In the 1880s, European rock climbing became an independent pursuit outside of mountain climbing. [2] Although rock climbing was an important component of Victorian mountaineering in the Alps , it is generally thought that the sport of rock climbing began in the last quarter of the nineteenth century in various parts of Europe . Rock climbing evolved gradually from an alpine necessity to a distinct athletic activity. From the middle of the 19th century, the founder of the Alpine Club , John Ball , researched and made known the Dolomites. He was followed there by many other climbers such as Paul Grohmann , Edward R. Whitwell, Michael Innerkofler , Angelo Dibona and Tita Piaz with many first ascents. [3] Just before the First World War, there was a so-called "Mauerhakenstreit" (German: the Great Piton Debate of 1911) in Central Europe regarding the use of aids in climbing and mountaineering. Paul Preuss and Hans Dülfer were the main actors in these discussions, which have essentially continued to this day. Preuss propagated a pure climbing style. Angelo Dibona, on the other hand, was an advocate of security and was not fundamentally averse to pitons. When Luis Trenker asked how many pitons he had hit in total in life, Dibona replied: "Fifteen, six of them on the Laliderer north face, three on the Ödstein, two on the Croz dell 'Altissimo, one on the Einser and the rest on other difficult climbs." [4] [5] [6] Aid climbing , climbing using equipment that acts as artificial handhold or footholds, became popular during the period 1920–1960, leading to ascents in the Alps and in Yosemite Valley that were considered impossible without such means. However, climbing techniques, equipment and ethical considerations have evolved steadily. Today, free climbing , climbing using holds made entirely of natural rock while using gear solely for protection and not for upward movement, is the most popular form of the sport. Free climbing has since been divided into several sub-styles of climbing dependent on belay configuration. Over time, grading systems have also been created in order to compare more accurately the relative difficulties of the rock climbs. On August 3, 2016, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) formally announced that sport climbing would be a medal sport in the 2020 Summer Olympics. [7] The event debut was postponed to 2021, due to COVID-19 . [8] Style[ edit ] In How to Rock Climb, John Long writes that for moderately skilled climbers simply getting to the top of a route is not enough- how one gets to the top matters. [9] Within free climbing, there are several distinctions given to ascents: [10] [11] [12] On-sighting a route requires that the climber ascend cleanly (without any falls or rest with the assistance of artificial equipment) on their first attempt without any foreknowledge. Flashing also requires a clean ascent on the first try, though the climber has previous information about the route (often called beta ). This may include talking about the route with other climbers or observing others climb the route. Redpointing means to make a successful free ascent of the route after having previously tried it. This may include multiple days or even years of "working" the route to learn the specific sequence required. Pinkpointing means to make a successful free ascent of the route after having previously tried it, with protection (or "pro") such as quickdraws or trad equipment pre-placed on the route. Style is mostly up to each individual climber and even among climbers the verbiage and definitions can differ. Style can also refer to more intrinsic differences a climber's physical performance while climbing. As such climbers can be referred to as more dynamic (using greater force) or static (controlled movements) in their climbing style. Ethics are values of a more general nature that are linked to the activity [13] acting in accord with "sportsmanship" acting in accord with nature preservation, sustainable, and Leave No Trace (LNT) practices acting in accord with local culture and history In sportsmanship, being a "good sport" is the highest honor; be honest, show respect for the opponent and the challenge – and not least take both success and adversity with dignified calm. Go for the ball and not the man. When establishing new routes, the local ethics and customs should be considered. In Elbsandstein, bolts are OK if placed from below, by hand, not by cracks and not too close. At Gritstone, only removable protection is permissible. In the Alps, several styles live in parallel. The number of bolted routes has become so large that the UIAA is worried that the opportunity for naturally protected climbing will diminish. The UIAA uses both style and ethics in its argument, but the goal is to protect some areas that may be the arena for what they call "adventure climbing".[ citation needed ] Types of climbing[ edit ] Most of the climbing done in modern times is considered free climbing —climbing using one's own physical strength, with equipment used solely as protection and not as support—as opposed to aid climbing , the gear-dependent form of climbing that was dominant in the sport's earlier days. Free climbing is typically divided into several styles that differ from one another depending on the choice of equipment used and the configurations of their belay, rope and anchor systems. As routes get higher off the ground, the increased risk of life-threatening injuries necessitates additional safety measures. A variety of specialized climbing techniques and climbing equipment exists to provide that safety. Climbers will usually work in pairs and utilize a system of ropes and anchors designed to catch falls. Ropes and anchors can be configured in different ways to suit many styles of climbing, and roped climbing are thus divided into further sub-types that vary based on how their belay systems are set up. Generally speaking, beginners will start with top roping and/or easy bouldering and work their way up to lead climbing and beyond. Due to the length of time and extended endurance required, and because accidents are most likely to happen on the descent, rock climbers do not usually climb back down the route, or "downclimb," especially on the larger multiple pitch class III–IV, or multi-day grade IV–VI climbs. Main article: Aid climbing Still the most popular method of climbing big walls, aid climbers make progress up a wall by repeatedly placing and weighting gear that is used directly to aid ascent and enhance safety. This form of climbing is typically used when ascent is too technically difficult or impossible for free climbing. Man sport climbing under overhang Main article: Free climbing The most commonly used method to ascend climbs, Free climbing refers to climbs where the climber's own physical strength and skill are relied upon to accomplish the climb. Free climbing may rely on top rope belay systems, or on lead climbing to establish protection and the belay stations. Anchors, ropes and protection are used to back up the climber and are passive as opposed to active ascending aids. Sub-types of free climbing are trad climbing and sport climbing . Free climbing is generally done as "clean lead" meaning no pitons or pins are used as protection. [14] Main article: Bouldering Climbing on short, low routes without the use of the safety rope that is typical of most other styles. Protection, if used at all, typically consists of a cushioned bouldering pad below the route and a spotter, a person who watches from below and directs the fall of the climber away from hazardous areas. Bouldering may be an arena for intense and relatively safe competition, resulting in exceptionally high difficulty standards. Main article: Free soloing Free soloing, referred to as "soloing" in the UK, is single-person climbing without the use of any rope or protection system. If a fall occurs the climber is likely to be killed or seriously injured. Though technically similar to bouldering, free solo climbing typically refers to routes that are far taller and/or far more lethal if a fall were to occur than bouldering. The term "highball" is used to refer to climbing on the boundary between free soloing and bouldering, where what is usually climbed as a boulder problem may be high enough for a fall to cause serious injury (20 ft. and higher) and hence could also be considered to be a free solo. Deep-water solo (DWS)[ edit ] Main article: Deep-water soloing Deep-water soloing (or psicobloc) is similar to free soloing in that the climber is unprotected and without a rope, but should the climber fall, it is into deep water instead of onto the ground. Main article: Roped solo climbing Solo climbing with a rope secured at the beginning of the climb allowing a climber to self-belay as they advance. Once the pitch is completed the soloist must descend the rope to retrieve their gear. This form of climbing can be conducted free or as a form of aid climbing. Main article: Lead climbing Leader belays the second on Illusion Dweller in Joshua Tree National Park , United States. Lead climbing is a climbing technique where the lead climber ascends with the rope passing through intermittent anchors that are below them, rather than through a top anchor, as in top-rope climb. A partner belays from below the lead climber, by feeding out enough rope to allow upward progression without undue slack. As the leader progresses they use a runner and carabiners to clip the rope into intermediate points of protection such as active cams , or passive protection such as nuts ; this limits the length of a potential fall. The leader also may clip into pre-placed bolts . Indoor gyms might have short runners pre-attached to fixed anchor points in the wall. Unlike top-rope climbing, where the climber is always supported by an anchor located above them, lead climbing often involves scenarios where the climber will be attached to a point under them. In these cases, if the climber were to fall, the distance fallen would be much greater than that of top-rope and this is one of the main reasons lead climbing can be dangerous. The fall factor is the ratio of the height a climber falls and the length of rope available to absorb the fall. The higher the fall factor, the more force placed on the climber as the ropes decelerate them. The maximum fall factor is 2. It is often advised that climbers who are interested in lead climbing should learn from experienced climbers and participate in training sessions before lead climbing on their own. Main article: Multi-pitch climbing The climbing rope is of a fixed length; the climber can only climb the length of the rope. Routes longer than the rope length are broken up into several segments called pitches; this is known as multi-pitch climbing . At the top of a pitch, the first climber to ascend (also known as the leader), sets up an anchor and then belays the second climber (also known as the follower) up to the anchor; as the second climber follows the route taken by the leader, the second climber removes ("cleans") the carabiners and anchors placed along the way in order to use them again on the next pitch. While "cleaning" the route, the follower attaches the carabiners and anchors to his or her harness belt loops. Once both climbers are at the top anchor, the leader begins climbing the next pitch, and so on, until the top of the route is reached. In either case, upon completion of a route, climbers can walk back down if an alternate descent path exists, or rappel (abseil) down with the rope. Main article: Sport climbing The act of climbing single- or multi-pitch routes, protected by permanently-fixed bolts and anchors drilled into the rock, using a rope and the aid of a belayer. Unlike traditional rock climbing, sport climbing involves the use of protection (bolts) placed with power drills or on rappel or permanent anchors which are attached to the rock walls. This is separate from bolted trad climbing. Main article: Traditional climbing Traditional or trad climbing involves rock climbing routes in which protection against falls is placed by the climber while ascending. Typically, when bolts are used, they had been placed on lead by the first ascensionist party. More commonly removable gear such as cams, hexes, and nuts are placed in constrictions or cracks in the rock to protect against falls, but not to aid the ascent directly. Due to the difficulty of placing bolts on lead, bolts tend to be placed farther apart than on many sport climbs. Historically, pitons (a kind of deformable nail) were placed in constrictions in the rock instead of hexes, nuts and cams. These are difficult to remove and often destructive to the rock, resulting in pin scars and a number of unremovable "fixed" pitons on many older routes. These are frequently used in a similar fashion to bolts, although they are not as strong and by convention are not considered when evaluating if a route is a trad climb, sport climb or mixed climb the way bolts might be. Top roping Balthazar (12), in the Morialta Conservation Park near Adelaide, South Australia . Top roping is the most accessible style of climbing for beginners. Commonly known as top roping, top rope climbing is climbing in which a climber is belayed from the ground or the base of the route. A belay system resembling a pulley in which an anchor has been created at the top of a climb, through which the rope runs through from the belayer on the ground, to the climber on the ground (position before starting the climb). The rope is "taken-in," to clear up the slack as the climber moves upwards, so in the event of a fall, the climber falls the shortest distance possible. The length of a fall is normally no more than a meter, but can vary depending on the length of the route (the longer the rope, the more stretch the rope will undergo when weighted) and the weight of the climber compared to that of the belayer, among other things. Top Roping[ edit ] Belaying a climber from the top of a route, bringing them up to walk off or continue on to next pitch. A similarly safe system of climbing a route as top-roping, except the belayer has set the anchors at the top of the climb (normally after leading a route, in which case the climber is "seconding") to belay the climber either indirectly (belayer is part of the system and can be vulnerable when exposed to unexpected directions of pull and loading of the rope) or directly (belayer is not part of the system and belaying is done directly from the anchors using either an Italian / Munter Hitch or adapted use of a belay device), up the route from the top. If bolts have been clipped or traditional gear placements have been made, it is the job of the climber to collect and clean the route. Main article: Via ferrata A method of fairly easily ascending a route, heavily dependent on permanent protection rather than using natural rock features to proceed. Climber with climbing gear attached at his harness Main article: Crack climbing In crack climbing, the climber ascends a rock crack using specific techniques such as jamming, stemming, and laying back. Cracks can vary in size from smaller than the width of a finger to larger than human body size. Climbers may protect their hands from sharp-edged rock with tape. Main article: Face climbing Face climbing is a type of climbing where climbers use features and irregularities in the rock such as finger pockets and edges to ascend a vertical rock face. Main article: Slab climbing Slab climbing, also known as friction climbing, is classified by the slope of the rock. A slope for slab climbing is less than ninety degrees, and prioritizes footwork. It is also known as friction climbing, and although this might sound easy, slab is considered one of the more challenging types of climbing. Popular techniques for slab are smearing, maintaining a center of gravity, and high steps. Two of the most renowned locations for slab climbing are Joshua Tree and Yosemite, but the Looking Glass mountain and Moab are also great options. The hardest slab route ever climbed is Cryptography located in Saint Loup, Switzerland, and ascended by Alessandro Zeni. [15] [16] [17] Main article: Simul climbing Short for "simultaneous", simul climbing is when two climbers move at the same time. The pseudo-lead climber places gear that the pseudo-follower collects. When the leader runs low on gear they construct a belay station where the follower can join them to exchange gear. The stronger climber is often the pseudo-follower since a fall by the follower would pull the leader from below towards the last piece of gear—a potentially devastating fall for the leader. In contrast, a fall from the leader would pull the follower from above, resulting in a less serious fall. Most speed ascents involve some form of simul climbing but may also include sections of standard free climbing and the use of placed gear for advancement (i.e. partial aid or pulling on gear). Main articles: Grade (climbing) and Grade (bouldering) Climbing communities in many countries and regions have developed their own rating systems for routes. Ratings, or grades, record and communicate consensus appraisals of difficulty. Systems of ratings are inherently subjective in nature, and variation of difficulty can be seen between two climbs of the same grade. Hence, there may be occasional disagreements arising from physiological or stylistic differences among climbers. The practice of rating a climb below its actual difficulty is known as sandbagging . The most commonly used rating systems in the United States are the Yosemite Decimal System and the Hueco V-scale bouldering grade. The current ranges for climbing routes are 5.0 for easy beginner routes to 5.15 being world class and V0–V17, respectively. As the limit of human climbing ability has not yet been reached, neither grading system has a definite endpoint and they are thus subject to revision. [18] Climbing grades simplified. There are many other grades but these are the most used. The ratings take into account multiple factors affecting a route, such as the slope of the ascent, the quantity and quality of available handholds, the distance between holds, ease of placing protection and whether advanced technical maneuvers are required. Typically the rating for the hardest move on the wall will be the rating for the whole climb. While the height of a route is generally not considered a factor, a long series of sustained hard moves will often merit a higher grade than a single move of the same technical difficulty. For example, a climb with multiple 5.11 moves with no rests may thus be rated a 5.12. Main article: Glossary of climbing terms As climbing routes or problems increase in difficulty, climbers learn to develop skills that help them complete the climbs clean. There are several techniques for hands and feet as well as terms for motions that combine the two. For indoor gyms, route setters visualize and create routes for climbers, placing different kinds of holds in specific parts of the wall at particular angles because they intend climbers to use certain techniques. Types of holds[ edit ] Jug: A large open hold. Typically in the shape of a V. Sloper: A negative smooth hold, typically in the shape of a ball or half moon. Pockets: A hold that has a hole in it with just enough room for one or two fingers to fit inside of it. [19] Woman using a negative sloper as main hold Horn: A protruding hold that is typically smooth like a sloper. These are held by wrapping your arm, or entire palm around the hold. The more surface area you have on this hold the better. Pinch: A pinch can either be used vertically or horizontally. With a pinch hold, the muscles between the index finger and thumb are used. [19] Crimp/Crimper: A crimp hold allows climbers to use their fingertips to grab edges; the fingers arch. Arête: A sharp corner or vertical edge [19] Volume: Volumes are wood or fiberglass structures that are supported by the climbing wall. They are generally giant, prism-like features that are introduced to change the dynamics of the wall. In Europe large climbing holds can be considered volumes, while in the US, the actual surface volume of the wall is changed by a volume. Crack: A gap between two opposing walls that a climber can jam their fingers, fist, or other body parts in to pull themselves up. Climber using an edge to pull herself up Main article: Indoor climbing Indoor climbing occurs in buildings on artificial rock structures. This permits for climbing in all types of weather and at all times of the day. Climbers climb indoors to improve their skills and techniques, as well as for general exercise or fun. Indoor climbing gyms typically provide rope setups and ensure that new climbers know safe techniques. Outdoor[ edit ] Outdoors, climbs usually take place on sunny days when the holds are dry and provide the best grip, but climbers can also attempt to climb at night or in adverse weather conditions if they have the proper training and equipment. However, night climbing or climbing in adverse weather conditions will increase the difficulty and danger on any climbing route. Main article: Rock-climbing equipment Most climbers choose to wear specialized rubber climbing shoes which are often of a smaller size than their normal street shoes in order to improve sensitivity towards foot placements and use the tightness to their advantage. Climbing chalk (MgCO3) is commonly used as a drying agent to minimize sweating of the hands. Most other equipment is of a protective nature. Rock climbing is inherently dangerous, so to minimize the potential consequences resulting from a fall, climbers use protection . The most basic protective equipment is a climbing rope . Climbing pioneers would attach the rope to themselves; in the event of a fall, the rope would usually cause injury to the climber in the hope that it prevented death. With advances in technology came the development of specialized harnesses , carabiners which are used for clipping into belay and rappel anchors and connecting gear, and belay devices which are used to catch a falling climber, hold or lower a climber and for rappelling. Eventually, the placement of bolts with the use of quickdraws led to the rise of sport climbing . Traditional climbers developed the spring-loaded camming device , which allowed a wider variety of climbing styles to be adequately protected compared to chocks and hexes . Traditionally pitons were used however in most areas protection which damages the rock is discouraged. Most climbers choose to wear a specialized climbing helmet to protect them from falling rocks or equipment or head injuries from crashing into rocks. [20] Main article: Climbing injuries Injuries in rock climbing are mainly sports injuries that occur due to falls or overuse. Injuries due to falls are relatively uncommon; the vast majority of injuries result from overuse, most often occurring in the fingers, elbows, and shoulders. [21] Such injuries are often no worse than torn calluses, cuts, burns and bruises. There are a number of skincare products specifically for climbers available in the market. However, overuse symptoms, if ignored, may lead to permanent damage especially to tendons, tendon sheaths, ligaments, and capsules. Taping of fingers and elbows to prevent injuries is common practice and there are various techniques for taping. [22] Photo topos[ edit ] Topo image of cliff Toix Est in the Costa Blanca region of Spain, by climber Chris Craggs from a Rockfax guidebook Illustrated photo-topos are widely used in rock climbing. Many of them are found in climbing and mountaineering guidebooks such as those published by Rockfax, [23] or the British Mountaineering Council . [24] Full-colour photo-topo diagrams have replaced the previous generation of text based guidebooks, which were illustrated with hand-drawn diagrams. The use of drones has helped improve the quality of images of many of the cliffs. [25] Cultural considerations[ edit ] Some areas that are popular for climbing, for example in the United States and Australia , are also sacred places for indigenous peoples. Many such indigenous people would prefer that climbers not climb these sacred places and have made this information well known to climbers. A well-known example is the rock formation that Americans have named Devils Tower National Monument . [26] Native American cultural concerns also led to complete climbing closures at Cave Rock at Lake Tahoe , [27] Monument Valley , Shiprock and Canyon de Chelly . [28] Climbing activities can sometimes encroach on rock art sites. The potential threat to these resources has led to climbing restrictions and closures in places like Hueco Tanks , Texas , [29] and portions of City of Rocks National Reserve , Idaho . In Australia , the monolith Uluru (Ayers Rock) is sacred to local indigenous communities and climbing is banned. [30] Elsewhere in Australia, many formerly popular climbing routes in areas such as the Grampians and Arapiles have been closed or partially closed due to indigenous cultural concerns. Indigenous peoples are not the only cultures that object to climbing on certain rock formations. Professional climber Dean Potter kicked off a major controversy when he ignored long-accepted convention to scale Delicate Arch in 2006, resulting in strict new climbing regulations in Arches National Park . [31] Private property[ edit ] Many significant rock outcrops exist on private land. Some people within the rock climbing community have been guilty of trespassing in many cases, often after land ownership transfers and previous access permission is withdrawn. In the U.S. the climbing community responded to access closures by forming the Access Fund . This is an "advocacy organization that keeps U.S. climbing areas open and conserves the climbing environment. Five core programs support the mission on national and local levels: public policy, stewardship and conservation (including grants), grassroots activism, climber education and land acquisition." [32] In the U.K. the British Mountaineering Council represents climbers and their interest of public access to crags, cliffs and boulders. In Europe there are different rules in different countries regarding the rights of landowners and climbers. [33] Main article: Clean climbing Although many climbers adhere to "minimal impact" and " leave no trace " practices, rock climbing is sometimes damaging to the environment. Common environmental damages include: soil erosion , breaking rock features, chalk accumulation, litter, abandoned bolts and ropes, human excrement, introduction of foreign plants through seeds on shoes and clothing, as well as damage to native plant species (especially those growing in cracks and on ledges as these are often intentionally removed during new route development through a process commonly referred to as cleaning). [34] The introduction of fixed anchors and bolts in climbing areas have brought lasting changes to landscapes. Drilling and placement of anchors and bolts has contributed to rock degradation, this impacts the visual appeal and ecological stability of the climbing site. Safety equipment implementation into natural landscapes is practice that can heavily alter or impact an ecosystem that relies on structure. Arid landscapes that are often desirable for rock climbing commonly have fragile soil dynamics that can be easily disturbed by human activities. Popular climbing areas have been significantly altered due to indiscriminate altering of the landscape. The " leave no trace " practice is something that cannot be obtained without proper knowledge of what types of traces to avoid. [35] Clean climbing is a style of rock climbing which seeks to minimize some of the aesthetically damaging side effects of some techniques used in trad climbing and more often, aid climbing by avoiding using equipment such as pitons, which damage rock. Climbing can also interfere with raptor nesting since the two activities often take place on the same precipitous cliffs. Many climbing area land managers institute nesting season closures of cliffs known to be used by protected birds of prey like eagles , falcons and osprey . [36] Many non-climbers also object to the appearance of climbing chalk marks, anchors, bolts and slings on visible cliffs. Since these features are small, visual impacts can be mitigated through the selection of neutral, rock-matching colors for bolt hangers, webbing and chalk. The use of certain types of climbing gear is banned altogether at some crags due to the risk of damage to the rock face. In such cases, climbers use knotted slings and ropes for climbing protection . Blowtorching is another climbing-induced impact that affects the rocks themselves. Blowtorching is when a climber uses a blowtorch to dry holds on a wet route. This mainly happens in areas that tend to have wet climbing conditions. Blowtorching is not only detrimental to the rock itself and can have permanent damage but it also leaves a very large burn mark that most non-climbers would object to. Vandalism[ edit ] The most significant form of vandalism directly attributable to rock climbers is the alteration of the climbing surface to render it more climber-friendly. Today, the charge of vandalism in climbing is more often a disagreement with land managers over the appropriateness of drilling and placing permanent bolts and other anchors. Although new fixed anchors are rarely placed by climbers repeating an ascent, their dependency on the existing fixed anchors results in the difference between life and death. However, the existing anchors remain on the climbing structure for long periods of time, and in cases where old or inappropriate hardware was installed can leave permanent stains on the rock face. Due to the permanent nature of fixed anchors, they were prohibited by the Wilderness Act. However, in 1990, there was a movement by the Forest Service and the Task Group to change the regulations such that fixed anchors would be allowed but still regulated in wilderness areas. These improvements led to protection for both the climbers and the Wilderness Act. [37]
Start of the 2009 Stockholm Marathon Most participants do not run a marathon to win. More important for most runners is their personal finishing time and their placement within their specific gender and age group, though some runners just want to finish. Strategies for completing a marathon include running the whole distance [160] and a run–walk strategy. [4] In 2005, the average marathon time in the U.S. was 4 hours 32 minutes 8 seconds for men, 5 hours 6 minutes 8 seconds for women. [161] In 2015, the men's and women's median marathon times were 4 hours 20 minutes 13 seconds and 4 hours 45 minutes 30 seconds respectively. [162] A goal many runners aim for is to break certain time barriers. For example, recreational first-timers often try to run the marathon under four hours; more competitive runners may attempt to finish under three hours. [163] Other benchmarks are the qualifying times for major marathons. The Boston Marathon , the oldest marathon in the United States, requires a qualifying time for all non-professional runners. [164] The New York City Marathon also requires a qualifying time for guaranteed entry, at a significantly faster pace than Boston's. [165] Typically, there is a maximum allowed time of about six hours after which the marathon route is closed, although some larger marathons keep the course open considerably longer (eight hours or more). Many marathons around the world have such time limits by which all runners must have crossed the finish line. Anyone slower than the limit will be picked up by a sweeper bus. In many cases the marathon organizers are required to reopen the roads to the public so that traffic can return to normal. With the growth in popularity of marathon-running, many marathons across the United States and the world have been filling to capacity faster than ever before. When the Boston Marathon opened up registration for its 2011 running, the field capacity was filled within eight hours. [166] Training[ edit ] MoonWalk is a nocturnal charity marathon to raise money for breast cancer research. The long run is an important element in marathon training. [167] Recreational runners commonly try to reach a maximum of about 32 km (20 mi) in their longest weekly run and a total of about 64 km (40 mi) a week when training for the marathon, but wide variability exists in practice and in recommendations. More experienced marathoners may run a longer distance during the week. Greater weekly training mileages can offer greater results in terms of distance and endurance, but also carry a greater risk of training injury. [168] Most male elite marathon runners will complete weekly distances of over 160 km (100 mi). [168] It is recommended that those new to running should get a checkup from their doctor, as there are certain warning signs and risk factors that should be evaluated before undertaking any new workout program, especially marathon training. [169] Many training programs last a minimum of five or six months, with a gradual increase in the distance run and finally, for recovery, a period of tapering in the one to three weeks preceding the race. For beginners wishing to merely finish a marathon, a minimum of four months of running four days a week is recommended. [170] [171] Many trainers recommend a weekly increase in mileage of no more than 10%. It is also often advised to maintain a consistent running program for six weeks or so before beginning a marathon training program, to allow the body to adapt to the new stresses. [172] The marathon training program itself would suppose variation between hard and easy training, with a periodization of the general plan. [173] Training programs can be found at the websites of Runner's World , [174] Hal Higdon , [160] Jeff Galloway , [4] RunnersWorld Tulsa Archived 30 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine , and the Boston Athletic Association , [175] and in numerous other published sources, including the websites of specific marathons. Many local running stores sponsor training programs for the community. RunnersWorld Tulsa Archived 30 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine , for example, has half and full marathon training programs that consider an individual's pace and desired distance. These kinds of groups offer connection to your running community—an invaluable source of support, encouragement, and accountability. The last long training run might be undertaken up to two weeks prior to the event. Many marathon runners also "carbo-load" (increase carbohydrate intake while holding total caloric intake constant) during the week before the marathon to allow their bodies to store more glycogen . Glycogen and "the wall"[ edit ] Main article: Hitting the wall Carbohydrates that a person eats are converted by the liver and muscles into glycogen for storage. Glycogen burns rapidly to provide quick energy. Runners can store about 8 MJ or 2,000 kcal worth of glycogen in their bodies, enough for about 30 km/18–20 miles of running. Many runners report that running becomes noticeably more difficult at that point. [176] When glycogen runs low, the body must then obtain energy by burning stored fat, which does not burn as readily. When this happens, the runner will experience dramatic fatigue and is said to " hit the wall ". The aim of training for the marathon, according to many coaches, [177] is to maximize the limited glycogen available so that the fatigue of the "wall" is not as dramatic. This is accomplished in part by utilizing a higher percentage of energy from burned fat even during the early phase of the race, thus conserving glycogen.[ citation needed ] Carbohydrate-based " energy gels " are used by runners to avoid or reduce the effect of "hitting the wall", as they provide easy to digest energy during the run. Energy gels usually contain varying amounts of sodium and potassium and some also contain caffeine. They need to be consumed with a certain amount of water. Recommendations for how often to take an energy gel during the race range widely. [177] A runner getting encouragement at Mile 25 of the Boston Marathon Alternatives to gels include various forms of concentrated sugars, and foods high in simple carbohydrates that can be digested easily. Many runners experiment with consuming energy supplements during training runs to determine what works best for them. Consumption of food while running sometimes makes the runner sick. Runners are advised not to ingest a new food or medicine just prior to or during a race. [177] It is also important to refrain from taking any of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory class of pain relievers ( NSAIDs , e.g., aspirin , ibuprofen , naproxen ), as these drugs may change the way the kidneys regulate their blood flow and may lead to serious kidney problems, especially in cases involving moderate to severe dehydration. NSAIDS block the COX-2 enzyme pathway to prevent the production of prostaglandins. These prostaglandins may act as inflammation factors throughout the body, but they also play a crucial role in maintenance of water retention. In less than 5% of the whole population that take NSAIDS, individuals may be more negatively sensitive to renal prostaglandin synthesis inhibition. [178] Temperature[ edit ] A study of the performance of 1.8 million participants in the Berlin, London, Paris, Boston, Chicago, and New York marathons during the years from 2001 to 2010 found that runners recorded their fastest times when the temperature was around 6 °C (43 °F), with an increase of 10 °C (18 °F) leading to a 1.5% reduction in speed. [179] [180] A July 2020 study found that increasing temperatures affected faster runners' performance more than slower ones. [181] After a marathon[ edit ] Marathon participation may result in various medical, musculoskeletal , and dermatological complaints. [182] Delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS) is a common condition affecting runners during the first week following a marathon. [183] Various types of mild exercise or massage have been recommended to alleviate pain secondary to DOMS. [183] Dermatological issues frequently include " jogger's nipple ", " jogger's toe ", and blisters . [184] The immune system is reportedly suppressed for a short time. [185] Changes to the blood chemistry may lead physicians to mistakenly diagnose heart malfunction. [186] After long training runs and the marathon itself, consuming carbohydrates to replace glycogen stores and protein to aid muscle recovery is commonly recommended. In addition, soaking the lower half of the body for approximately 20 minutes in cold or ice water may force blood through the leg muscles to speed recovery. [187] [188] See also: List of marathon fatalities Marathon running has various health risks, though these can be diminished with preparation and care. [189] Training and the races themselves can put runners under stress. While very rare, even death is a possibility during a race. Common minor health risks include blisters , tendonitis , fatigue , knee or ankle sprain , dehydration ( electrolyte imbalance ), and other conditions. Many are categorised as overuse injuries. Cardiac health[ edit ] Officers patrolling a marathon course in Ukraine In 2016, a systematic medical review found that the risk of sudden cardiac death during or immediately after a marathon was between 0.6 and 1.9 deaths per 100,000 participants, varying across the specific studies and the methods used, and not controlling for age or gender. [190] Since the risk is small, cardiac screening programs for marathons are uncommon. However, this review was not an attempt to assess the overall cardiac health impact of marathon running. A 2006 study of non-elite Boston Marathon participants tested runners for certain proteins that indicate heart damage or dysfunction (see Troponin ) and gave them echocardiogram scans, before and after the marathon. The study revealed that, in that sample of 60 people, runners who had averaged fewer than 56 km (35 mi) of weekly training in the 4 months before the race were most likely to show some heart damage or dysfunction, while runners who had done more than 72 km (45 mi) of weekly training showed few or no heart problems. [191] According to a Canadian study presented in 2010, running a marathon can temporarily result in decreased function of more than half the muscle segments in the heart's main pumping chamber, but neighboring segments are generally able to compensate. Full recovery is reached within three months. The fitter the runner, the less the effect. The runners with decreased left ventricle function had an average peak weekly training distance of 55.1 km (34.2 mi), while those who did not averaged 69.1 km (42.9 mi). The marathon was held in 35 °C (95 °F) weather. According to one of the researchers: "Regular exercise reduces cardiovascular risk by a factor of two or three in the long run, but while we're doing vigorous exercise such as marathon running, our cardiac risk increases by seven." [192] [193] Hydration[ edit ] A volunteer hands out fluids at a marathon water stop Overconsumption is the most significant concern associated with water consumption during marathons. Drinking excessive amounts of fluid during a race can lead to dilution of sodium in the blood, a condition called exercise-associated hyponatremia , which may result in vomiting, seizures, coma and even death. [194] Dr. Lewis G. Maharam, medical director for the New York City Marathon, stated in 2005: "There are no reported cases of dehydration causing death in the history of world running, but there are plenty of cases of people dying of hyponatremia." [195] For example, Dr. Cynthia Lucero died at the age of 28 while participating in the 2002 Boston Marathon . It was Lucero's second marathon. [196] At mile 22, Lucero complained of feeling "dehydrated and rubber-legged." [197] She soon wobbled and collapsed to the ground, and was unconscious by the time the paramedics reached her. Lucero was admitted to Brigham and Women's Hospital and died two days later. [198] Lucero's cause of death was determined to be hyponatremic encephalopathy , a condition that causes swelling of the brain due to an imbalance of sodium in the blood known as exercise-associated hyponatremia (EAH). While EAH is sometimes referred to as " water intoxication ", Lucero drank large amounts of Gatorade during the race, [199] [200] demonstrating that runners who consume sodium-containing sports drinks in excess of thirst can still develop EAH. [199] [201] Because hyponatremia is caused by excessive water retention, and not just loss of sodium, consumption of sports drinks or salty foods may not prevent hyponatremia. [202] Women are more prone to hyponatremia than men. A study in the New England Journal of Medicine found that 13% of runners completing the 2002 Boston Marathon had hyponatremia. [203] The International Marathon Medical Directors Association (IMMDA) advised in 2006 that fluid intake should be adjusted individually according to factors such as body weight, sex, climate, pace, fitness ( VO2 max ), and sweat rate, as fluid requirements can vary between people depending on these variables. The IMMDA also recommended sports drinks that include carbohydrates and electrolytes instead of plain water and said that runners should "drink to thirst", trying to refrain from drinking at every fluid station before feeling thirsty. [204] Heat exposure leads to diminished thirst drive and thirst may not be a sufficient incentive to drink in many situations. [205] The IMMDA and HSL Harpur Hill give recommendations to drink fluid in small volumes frequently at an approximate rate falling between 100–250 ml (3.4–8.5 US fl oz) every 15 minutes. [205] [204] A patient suffering hyponatremia can be given a small volume of a concentrated salt solution intravenously to raise sodium concentrations in the blood. Some runners weigh themselves before running and write the results on their bibs. If anything goes wrong, first aid workers can use the weight information to tell if the patient had consumed too much water. Body temperature[ edit ] Exertional heat stroke is an emergency condition in which thermoregulation fails and the body temperature rises dangerously above 40 °C (104 °F). It becomes a greater risk in warm and humid weather, even for young and fit individuals. Treatment requires rapid physical cooling of the body. [206] Charity involvement[ edit ] Some charities seek to associate with various races. Some marathon organizers set aside a portion of their limited entry slots for charity organizations to sell to members in exchange for donations. Runners are given the option to sign up to run particular races, especially when marathon entries are no longer available to the general public.[ citation needed ] In some cases, charities organize their own marathon as a fund-raiser, gaining funds via entry fees or sponsorships.[ citation needed ] Culture[ edit ] Mars rover marathon Mars rover Opportunity's traverse in 2015 as it approached the Marathon Valley, and then traveled distance of a traditional marathon (about 42 kilometres (26 mi)) In 2015 the Mars rover Opportunity attained the distance of a marathon from its starting location on Mars, and the valley where it achieved this distance was called Marathon Valley, which was then explored. [207] [208]
Painting from Cremona ; end of the 16th century Jeu de paume in the 17th century Historians believe that the game's ancient origin lay in 12th-century northern France, where a ball was struck with the palm of the hand. [13] Louis X of France was a keen player of jeu de paume ("game of the palm"), which evolved into real tennis , and became notable as the first person to construct indoor tennis courts in the modern style. Louis was unhappy with playing tennis outdoors and accordingly had indoor, enclosed courts made in Paris "around the end of the 13th century". [14] In due course this design spread across royal palaces all over Europe. [14] In June 1316 at Vincennes , Val-de-Marne, and following a particularly exhausting game, Louis drank a large quantity of cooled wine and subsequently died of either pneumonia or pleurisy , although there was also suspicion of poisoning. [15] Because of the contemporary accounts of his death, Louis X is history's first tennis player known by name. [15] Another of the early enthusiasts of the game was King Charles V of France , who had a court set up at the Louvre Palace . [16] It was not until the 16th century that rackets came into use and the game began to be called "tennis", from the French term tenez, which can be translated as "hold!", "receive!" or "take!", an interjection used as a call from the server to his opponent. [17] It was popular in England and France, although the game was only played indoors, where the ball could be hit off the wall. Henry VIII of England was a big fan of this game, which is now known as real tennis . [18] An epitaph in St Michael's Church, Coventry , written c. 1705, read, in part: [19] Here lyes an old toss'd Tennis Ball: Was racketted, from spring to fall, With so much heat and so much hast, Time's arm for shame grew tyred at last. During the 18th and early 19th centuries, as real tennis declined, new racket sports emerged in England. [20] The invention of the first lawn mower in Britain in 1830 is believed to have been a catalyst for the preparation of modern-style grass courts, sporting ovals, playing fields, pitches, greens, etc. This in turn led to the codification of modern rules for many sports, including lawn tennis, most football codes, lawn bowls and others. [21] Origins of the modern game Augurio Perera 's house in Edgbaston , Birmingham , England, where he and Harry Gem first played the modern game of lawn tennis Between 1859 and 1865, Harry Gem , a solicitor, and his friend Augurio Perera developed a game that combined elements of racquets and the Basque ball game pelota , which they played on Perera's croquet lawn in Birmingham , England. [22] [23] In 1872, along with two local doctors, they founded the world's first tennis club on Avenue Road, Leamington Spa . [24] This is where "lawn tennis" was used as the name of an activity by a club for the first time. In Tennis: A Cultural History, Heiner Gillmeister reveals that on 8 December 1874, British army officer Walter Clopton Wingfield wrote to Harry Gem, commenting that he (Wingfield) had been experimenting with his version of lawn tennis "for a year and a half". [25] In December 1873, Wingfield designed and patented a game which he called sphairistikè ( Greek : σφαιριστική, meaning "ball-playing"), and which was soon known simply as "sticky" – for the amusement of guests at a garden party on his friend's estate of Nantclwyd Hall , in Llanelidan , Wales. [26] According to R. D. C. Evans, turfgrass agronomist , "Sports historians all agree that [Wingfield] deserves much of the credit for the development of modern tennis." [20] [27] According to Honor Godfrey, museum curator at Wimbledon, Wingfield "popularized this game enormously. He produced a boxed set which included a net, poles, rackets, balls for playing the game – and most importantly you had his rules. He was absolutely terrific at marketing and he sent his game all over the world. He had very good connections with the clergy, the law profession, and the aristocracy and he sent thousands of sets out in the first year or so, in 1874." [28] The world's oldest annual tennis tournament took place at Leamington Lawn Tennis Club in Birmingham in 1874. [29] This was three years before the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club would hold its first championships at Wimbledon, in 1877. The first Championships culminated in a significant debate on how to standardise the rules. [28] Lawn tennis in the US, 1887 In the United States in 1874, Mary Ewing Outerbridge , a young socialite, returned from Bermuda with a sphairistikè set. She became fascinated by the game of tennis after watching British army officers play. [30] She laid out a tennis court at the Staten Island Cricket Club at Camp Washington, Tompkinsville, Staten Island , New York. The first American National championship was played there in September 1880. An Englishman named O.E. Woodhouse won the singles title, and a silver cup worth $100, by defeating Canadian I. F. Hellmuth . [31] There was also a doubles match which was won by a local pair. There were different rules at each club. The ball in Boston was larger than the one normally used in New York. On 21 May 1881, the oldest nationwide tennis organization in the world [32] was formed, the United States National Lawn Tennis Association (now the United States Tennis Association ) in order to standardize the rules and organize competitions. [33] The US National Men's Singles Championship, now the US Open , was first held in 1881 at the Newport Casino , Newport, Rhode Island . [34] The US National Women's Singles Championships were first held in 1887 in Philadelphia . [35] Tennis doubles final at 1896 Olympic Games Tennis also became popular in France, where the French Championships date to 1891, although until 1925 they were open only to tennis players who were members of French clubs. [36] Thus, Wimbledon, the US Open, the French Open and the Australian Open (dating to 1905) became and have remained the most prestigious events in tennis. [37] [38] Together, these four events are called the Majors or Slams (a term borrowed from bridge rather than baseball ). [39] Lawn tennis in Canada, c. 1900 In 1913, the International Lawn Tennis Federation (ILTF), now the International Tennis Federation (ITF), was founded and established three official tournaments as the major championships of the day. The World Grass Court Championships were awarded to Great Britain. The World Hard Court Championships were awarded to France; the term "hard court" was used for clay courts at the time. Some tournaments were held in Belgium instead. And the World Covered Court Championships for indoor courts were awarded annually; Sweden, France, Great Britain, Denmark, Switzerland and Spain each hosted the tournament. [40] At a meeting held on 16 March 1923 in Paris, the title "World Championship" was dropped and a new category of "Official Championship" was created for events in Great Britain, France, the US and Australia [41] – today's Grand Slam events. [40] [42] The impact on the four recipient nations to replace the "world championships" with "official championships" was simple in a general sense: each became a major nation of the federation with enhanced voting power, and each now operated a major event. [40] The comprehensive rules promulgated in 1924 by the ILTF have remained largely stable in the ensuing 80 years, the one major change being the addition of the tiebreak system designed by Jimmy Van Alen . [43] That same year, tennis withdrew from the Olympics after the 1924 Games , but returned 60 years later as a 21-and-under demonstration event in 1984. This reinstatement was credited by the efforts of then ITF president Philippe Chatrier , ITF general secretary David Gray and ITF vice president Pablo Llorens, with support from International Olympic Committee president Juan Antonio Samaranch . The success of the event was overwhelming, and the IOC decided to reintroduce tennis as a full-medal sport at Seoul in 1988. [44] [45] International Tennis Hall of Fame at the Newport Casino , Newport, Rhode Island The Davis Cup , an annual competition between men's national teams, dates to 1900. [46] The analogous competition for women's national teams, the Fed Cup , was founded as the Federation Cup in 1963 to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the founding of the ITF. [47] In 1926, promoter C. C. Pyle established the first professional tennis tour with a group of American and French tennis players playing exhibition matches to paying audiences. [38] [48] The most notable of these early professionals were the American Vinnie Richards and the Frenchwoman Suzanne Lenglen . [38] [49] Players turned pro, would no longer permitted to compete in the major (amateur) tournaments. [38] In 1968, commercial pressures and rumours of some amateurs taking money under the table led to the abandonment of this distinction, inaugurating the Open Era , in which all players could compete in all tournaments, and top players were able to make their living from tennis. [50] With the beginning of the Open Era, the establishment of an international professional tennis circuit, and revenues from the sale of television rights, tennis's popularity has spread worldwide, and the sport has shed its middle-class English-speaking image [51] (although it is acknowledged that this stereotype still exists). [51] [52] In 1954, Van Alen founded the International Tennis Hall of Fame , a nonprofit museum in Newport, Rhode Island. [53] The building contains a large collection of tennis memorabilia as well as a hall of fame honouring prominent members and tennis players from all over the world. [54] Equipment Main article: Tennis technology Part of the appeal of tennis stems from the simplicity of equipment required for play. Beginners need only a racket and balls. [1] Racket of Franjo Punčec in a wooden frame – late 1930s Rackets Main article: Racket (sports equipment) § Tennis Wooden racket – c. 1920s The components of a tennis racket include a handle, known as the grip, connected to a neck which joins a roughly elliptical frame that holds a matrix of tightly pulled strings. For the first 100 years of the modern game, rackets were made of wood and of standard size, and strings were of animal gut . Laminated wood construction yielded more strength in rackets used through most of the 20th century until first metal and then composites of carbon graphite, ceramics, and lighter metals such as titanium were introduced. These stronger materials enabled the production of oversized rackets that yielded yet more power. Meanwhile, technology led to the use of synthetic strings that match the feel of gut yet with added durability. Under modern rules of tennis, the rackets must adhere to the following guidelines; [55] The hitting area, composed of the strings, must be flat and generally uniform. The frame of the hitting area may not be more than 29 inches (74 cm) in length and 12.5 inches (32 cm) in width. The entire racket must be of a fixed shape, size, weight, and weight distribution. There may not be any energy source built into the rackets. The rackets must not provide any kind of communication, instruction or advice to the player during the match. The rules regarding rackets have changed over time, as material and engineering advances have been made. For example, the maximum length of the frame had been 32 inches (81 cm) until 1997, when it was shortened to 29 inches (74 cm). [56] Many companies manufacture and distribute tennis rackets. Wilson, Head and Babolat are three of the most commonly used brands; however, many more companies exist. [57] The same companies sponsor players to use these rackets in the hopes that the company name will become better known by the public. Strings Main article: Strings (tennis) There are multiple types of tennis strings, including natural gut and synthetic stings made from materials such as nylon , kevlar , or polyester . [58] Two different tennis strings of lengths 12m (left), and 200 m (right) Natural gut The first type of tennis strings available were natural gut strings, introduced by Babolat. They were the only type used until synthetic strings were introduced in the 1950s. Natural gut strings are still used frequently by players such as Roger Federer. They are made from cow intestines, and provide increased power, and are easier on the arm than most strings. [59] Synthetic Most synthetic strings are made from monofilament or multifiliament nylon strings. Monofilament strings are cheap to buy, and are used widely by many recreational level players for their all round performance, while multifilament strings are created to mimic natural gut more closely by weaving together fibres, but are generally more expensive than their monofilament counterparts. [58] Polyester strings allow for more spin on the ball than any other string, due to their firm strings, while keeping control of the ball, and this is why many players use them, especially higher player ones. [60] Kevlar tennis strings are highly durable, and are mostly used by players that frequently break strings, because they maintain tension well, but these strings can be stiff on the arm. [61] Hybrid strings Hybrid stringing is when a tennis racket is strung with two different strings for the mains (the vertical strings) and the crosses (the horizontal strings). This is most commonly done with two different strings that are made of different materials, but can also be done with two different types of the same string. A notable example of a player using hybrid strings is Roger Federer, using natural gut strings in his mains and polyester strings in his crosses. [62] Balls Main article: Tennis ball A tennis racket and balls. Tennis balls were originally made of cloth strips stitched together with thread and stuffed with feathers. [63] Modern tennis balls are made of hollow vulcanized rubber with a felt coating. Traditionally white, the predominant colour was gradually changed to optic yellow in the latter part of the 20th century to allow for improved visibility. Tennis balls must conform to certain criteria for size, weight, deformation , and bounce to be approved for regulation play. The International Tennis Federation (ITF) defines the official diameter as 65.41–68.58 mm (2.575–2.700 in). Balls must weigh between 56.0 and 59.4 g (1.98 and 2.10 oz). [64] Tennis balls were traditionally manufactured in the United States and Europe. Although the process of producing the balls has remained virtually unchanged for the past 100 years, the majority of manufacturing now takes place in the Far East . The relocation is due to cheaper labour costs and materials in the region. [65] Tournaments that are played under the ITF Rules of Tennis must use balls that are approved by the International Tennis Federation (ITF) and be named on the official ITF list of approved tennis balls. [66] Manner of play For individual terms, see Glossary of tennis terms . Court Tennis court in Petäjävesi , Western Finland Province Tennis is played on a rectangular, flat surface. The court is 78 feet (23.77 m) long, and 27 feet (8.2 m) wide for singles matches and 36 ft (11 m) for doubles matches. [67] Additional clear space around the court is required in order for players to reach overrun balls. A net is stretched across the full width of the court, parallel with the baselines, dividing it into two equal ends. It is held up by either a cord or metal cable of diameter no greater than 0.8 cm (1⁄3 in). [66] The net is 3 feet 6 inches (1.07 m) high at the posts and 3 feet (0.91 m) high in the centre. [67] The net posts are 3 feet (0.91 m) outside the doubles court on each side or, for a singles net, 3 feet (0.91 m) outside the singles court on each side. The modern tennis court owes its design to Major Walter Clopton Wingfield . In 1873, Wingfield patented a court much the same as the current one for his stické tennis (sphairistike). This template was modified in 1875 to the court design that exists today, with markings similar to Wingfield's version, but with the hourglass shape of his court changed to a rectangle. [68] Tennis is unusual in that it is played on a variety of surfaces. [69] Grass , clay , and hard courts of concrete or asphalt topped with acrylic are the most common. Occasionally carpet is used for indoor play, with hardwood flooring having been historically used. Artificial turf courts can also be found. Lines The lines that delineate the width of the court are called the baseline (farthest back) and the service line (middle of the court). The short mark in the centre of each baseline is referred to as either the hash mark or the centre mark. The outermost lines that make up the length are called the doubles sidelines; they are the boundaries for doubles matches. The lines to the inside of the doubles sidelines are the singles sidelines, and are the boundaries in singles play. The area between a doubles sideline and the nearest singles sideline is called the doubles alley, playable in doubles play. The line that runs across the centre of a player's side of the court is called the service line because the serve must be delivered into the area between the service line and the net on the receiving side. Despite its name, this is not where a player legally stands when making a serve. [70] The line dividing the service line in two is called the centre line or centre service line. The boxes this centre line creates are called the service boxes; depending on a player's position, they have to hit the ball into one of these when serving. [71] A ball is out only if none of it has hit the area inside the lines, or the line, upon its first bounce. All lines are required to be between 1 and 2 inches (25 and 51 mm) in width, with the exception of the baseline which can be up to 4 inches (100 mm) wide, although in practice it is often the same width as the others. [70] Play of a single point Main article: Point (tennis) Two players before a serve . The players or teams start on opposite sides of the net. One player is designated the server, and the opposing player is the receiver. The choice to be server or receiver in the first game and the choice of ends is decided by a coin toss before the warm-up starts. Service alternates game by game between the two players or teams. For each point, the server starts behind the baseline, between the centre mark and the sideline. The receiver may start anywhere on their side of the net. When the receiver is ready, the server will serve , although the receiver must play to the pace of the server. For a service to be legal, the ball must travel over the net without touching it into the diagonally opposite service box. If the ball hits the net but lands in the service box, this is a let or net service, which is void, and the server retakes that serve. The player can serve any number of let services in a point and they are always treated as voids and not as faults. A fault is a serve that falls long or wide of the service box, or does not clear the net. There is also a "foot fault" when a player's foot touches the baseline or an extension of the centre mark before the ball is hit. If the second service, after a fault, is also a fault, the server double faults, and the receiver wins the point. However, if the serve is in, it is considered a legal service. A legal service starts a rally, in which the players alternate hitting the ball across the net. A legal return consists of a player hitting the ball so that it falls in the server's court, before it has bounced twice or hit any fixtures except the net. A player or team cannot hit the ball twice in a row. The ball must travel over or round the net into the other players' court. A ball that hits the net during a rally is considered a legal return as long as it crosses into the opposite side of the court. The first player or team to fail to make a legal return loses the point. The server then moves to the other side of the service line at the start of a new point. [72] Scoring "Break point" redirects here. For the software term, see Breakpoint . Game, set, match The scoreboard of a tennis match. Game A game consists of a sequence of points played with the same player serving. A game is won by the first player to have won at least four points in total and at least two points more than the opponent. The running score of each game is described in a manner peculiar to tennis: scores from zero to three points are described as "love", "15", "30", and "40", respectively. If at least three points have been scored by each player, making the player's scores equal at 40 apiece, the score is not called out as "40–40", but rather as "deuce". If at least three points have been scored by each side and a player has one more point than his opponent, the score of the game is "advantage" for the player in the lead. During informal games, advantage can also be called "ad in" or "van in" when the serving player is ahead, and "ad out" or "van out" when the receiving player is ahead; alternatively, either player may simply call out "my ad" or "your ad". The score of a tennis game during play is always read with the serving player's score first. In tournament play, the chair umpire calls the point count (e.g., "15–love") after each point. At the end of a game, the chair umpire also announces the winner of the game and the overall score. [73] Set A set consists of a sequence of games played with service alternating between games, ending when the count of games won meets certain criteria. Typically, a player wins a set by winning at least six games and at least two games more than the opponent. If one player has won six games and the opponent five, an additional game is played. If the leading player wins that game, the player wins the set 7–5. If the trailing player wins the game (tying the set 6–6) a tiebreak is played. A tiebreak, played under a separate set of rules, allows one player to win one more game and thus the set, to give a final set score of 7–6. A tiebreak game can be won by  scoring at least seven points and at least two points more than the opponent. In a tiebreak, two players serve by 'ABBA' system which has been proven to be fair. [74] If a tiebreak is not played, the set is referred to as an advantage set, where the set continues without limit until one player leads by a two-game margin. A "love set" means that the loser of the set won zero games, colloquially termed a "jam donut" in the US. [75] In tournament play, the chair umpire announces the winner of the set and the overall score. The final score in sets is always read with the winning player's score first, e.g. "6–2, 4–6, 6–0, 7–5". Match A match consists of a sequence of sets. The outcome is determined through a best of three or five sets system. On the professional circuit, men play best-of-five-set matches at all four Grand Slam tournaments, Davis Cup, and the final of the Olympic Games and best-of-three-set matches at all other tournaments, while women play best-of-three-set matches at all tournaments. The first player to win two sets in a best-of-three, or three sets in a best-of-five, wins the match. [76] Only in the final sets of matches at the Olympic Games and Fed Cup are tiebreaks not played. In these cases, sets are played indefinitely until one player has a two-game lead, occasionally leading to some remarkably long matches . In tournament play, the chair umpire announces the end of the match with the well-known phrase "Game, set, match" followed by the winning person's or team's name. Special point terms Game point A game point occurs in tennis whenever the player who is in the lead in the game needs only one more point to win the game. The terminology is extended to sets (set point), matches (match point), and even championships (championship point). For example, if the player who is serving has a score of 40–love, the player has a triple game point (triple set point, etc.) as the player has three consecutive chances to win the game. Game points, set points, and match points are not part of official scoring and are not announced by the chair umpire in tournament play. Break point A break point occurs if the receiver, not the server , has a chance to win the game with the next point. Break points are of particular importance because serving is generally considered advantageous, with servers being expected to win games in which they are serving. A receiver who has one (score of 30–40 or advantage), two (score of 15–40) or three (score of love–40) consecutive chances to win the game has break point, double break point or triple break point, respectively. If the receiver does, in fact, win their break point, the game is awarded to the receiver, and the receiver is said to have converted their break point. If the receiver fails to win their break point it is called a failure to convert. Winning break points, and thus the game, is also referred to as breaking serve, as the receiver has disrupted, or broken the natural advantage of the server. If in the following game the previous server also wins a break point it is referred to as breaking back. Except where tiebreaks apply, at least one break of serve is required to win a set (otherwise a two-game lead would never occur). Rule variations See also: Types of tennis match No ad From 'No advantage'. Scoring method created by Jimmy Van Alen . The first player or doubles team to win four points wins the game, regardless of whether the player or team is ahead by two points. When the game score reaches three points each, the receiver chooses which side of the court (advantage court or deuce court) the service is to be delivered on the seventh and game-deciding point. Utilized by World Team Tennis professional competition, ATP tours, WTA tours, ITF Pro Doubles and ITF Junior Doubles. [77] [78] Pro set Instead of playing multiple sets, players may play one pro set. A pro set is first to 8 (or 10) games by a margin of two games, instead of first to 6 games. A 12-point tiebreak is usually played when the score is 8–8 (or 10–10). These are often played with no-ad scoring. Match tiebreak This is sometimes played instead of a third set. A match tiebreak (also called super tiebreak) is played like a regular tiebreak, but the winner must win ten points instead of seven. Match tiebreaks are used in the Hopman Cup , Grand Slams (excluding Wimbledon ) and the Olympic Games for mixed doubles; on the ATP (since 2006), WTA (since 2007) and ITF (excluding four Grand Slam tournaments and the Davis Cup ) tours for doubles and as a player's choice in USTA league play. Fast4 Fast4 is a shortened format that offers a "fast" alternative, with four points, four games and four rules: there are no advantage scores, lets are played, tiebreakers apply at three games all, with it being first to five points with a "sudden death" point at four points all, and the first to four games wins the set. In the event of a no advantage deuce, the receiver gets to choose the service side. If a let occurs, the point continues as normal, and the non-receiver (in a doubles game) is permitted to return the serve. When players swap sides, they are not permitted to sit down and must be ready to play within sixty seconds. Between sets, players are permitted to sit down, and must be ready to play within ninety seconds. [79] [80] Another, however informal, tennis format is called Canadian doubles . This involves three players, with one person playing against a doubles team. The single player gets to utilize the alleys normally reserved only for a doubles team. Conversely, the doubles team does not use the alleys when executing a shot. The scoring is the same as for a regular game. This format is not sanctioned by any official body. "Australian doubles", another informal and unsanctioned form of tennis, is played with similar rules to the Canadian doubles style, only in this version, players rotate court position after each game, each player taking a turn at playing alone against the other two. As such, each player plays doubles and singles over the course of a match, with the singles player always serving. Scoring styles vary, but one popular method is to assign a value of 2 points to each game, with the server taking both points if he or she holds serve and the doubles team each taking one if they break serve. Wheelchair tennis can be played by able-bodied players as well as people who require a wheelchair for mobility. An extra bounce is permitted. This rule makes it possible to have mixed wheelchair and able-bodied matches. It is possible for a doubles team to consist of a wheelchair player and an able-bodied player (referred to as "one-up, one-down"), or for a wheelchair player to play against an able-bodied player. In such cases, the extra bounce is permitted for the wheelchair users only. Match play Convention expects that the two players shake hands at the end of a match. Continuity A tennis match is intended to be continuous. [81] Because stamina is a relevant factor, arbitrary delays are not permitted. In most cases, service is required to occur no more than 20 seconds after the end of the previous point. [81] This is increased to 90 seconds when the players change ends (after every odd-numbered game), and a 2-minute break is permitted between sets. [81] Other than this, breaks are permitted only when forced by events beyond the players' control, such as rain, damaged footwear, damaged racket, or the need to retrieve an errant ball. Should a player be deemed to be stalling repeatedly, the chair umpire may initially give a warning followed by subsequent penalties of "point", "game", and default of the match for the player who is consistently taking longer than the allowed time limit. [82] In the event of a rain delay, darkness or other external conditions halting play, the match is resumed at a later time, with the same score as at the time of the delay, and each player at the same end of the court as when rain halted play, or as close to the same relative compass point if play is resumed on a different court. Ball changes Balls wear out quickly in serious play and, therefore, in ATP and WTA tournaments, they are changed after every nine games with the first change occurring after only seven games, because the first set of balls is also used for the pre-match warm-up. [64] In ITF tournaments like Fed Cup , the balls are changed after every eleven games (rather than nine) with the first change occurring after only nine games (instead of seven). An exception is that a ball change may not take place at the beginning of a tiebreaker, in which case the ball change is delayed until the beginning of the second game of the next set. [66] As a courtesy to the receiver, the server will often signal to the receiver before the first serve of the game in which new balls are used as a reminder that they are using new balls. Continuity of the balls' condition is considered part of the game, so if a re-warm-up is required after an extended break in play (usually due to rain), then the re-warm-up is done using a separate set of balls, and use of the match balls is resumed only when play resumes. On-court coaching A recent rule change is to allow coaching on court on a limited basis during a match. [83] [84] [85] [86] This has been introduced in women's tennis for WTA Tour events in 2009 and allows the player to request her coach once per set. [87] Stance Stance refers to the way a player prepares themselves in order to best be able to return a shot. Essentially, it enables them to move quickly in order to achieve a particular stroke. There are four main stances in modern tennis: open, semi-open, closed, and neutral. All four stances involve the player crouching in some manner: as well as being a more efficient striking posture, it allows them to isometrically preload their muscles in order to play the stroke more dynamically. What stance is selected is strongly influenced by shot selection. A player may quickly alter their stance depending on the circumstances and the type of shot they intend to play. Any given stance also alters dramatically based upon the actual playing of the shot with dynamic movements and shifts of body weight occurring. [88] [89] Open stance This is the most common stance in tennis. The player's feet are placed parallel to the net. They may be pointing sideways, directly at the net or diagonally towards it. This stance allows for a high degree of torso rotation which can add significant power to the stroke. This process is sometimes likened to the coiling and uncoiling of a spring. i.e. the torso is rotated as a means of preloading the muscular system in preparation for playing the stroke: this is the coiling phase. When the stroke is played the torso rotates to face forwards again, called uncoiling, and adds significant power to the stroke. A disadvantage of this stance is that it does not always allow ‘for proper weight transfer and maintenance of balance’ [88] when making powerful strokes. It is commonly used for forehand strokes; double-handed backhands can also be made effectively from it. Semi-open stance This stance is somewhere between open and closed and is a very flexible stance. The feet are aligned diagonally towards the net. It allows for a lot of shoulder rotation and the torso can be coiled, before being uncoiled into the shot in order to increase the power of the shot. It is commonly used in modern tennis especially by ‘top professional players on the forehand’. [90] Two-handed backhands can also be employed from this stance. Closed stance The closed stance is the least commonly used of the three main stances. One foot is placed further towards the net with the other foot further from it; there is a diagonal alignment between the feet.  It allows for effective torso rotation in order to increase the power of the shot. It is usually used to play backhand shots and it is rare to see forehand shots played from it. A stroke from this stance may entail the rear foot coming completely off the floor with bodyweight being transferred entirely to the front foot. [88] [89] Neutral stance This is sometimes also referred to as the square stance. One foot is positioned closer to the net and ahead of the other which is  behind and in line with it. Both feet are aligned at a 90 degree angle to the net. The neutral stance is often taught early because ‘It allows beginners to learn about shifting weight and rotation of the body.’ [89] Forehands and backhands may be made from it. [91] Shots Main article: Tennis shots Competent tennis players have eight basic shots in their repertoire: the serve, forehand, backhand, volley, half-volley, overhead smash, drop shot, and lob. Grip Main article: Grip (Tennis) A grip is a way of holding the racket in order to hit shots during a match. The grip affects the angle of the racket face when it hits the ball and influences the pace, spin, and placement of the shot. Players use various grips during play, including the Continental (The "Handshake Grip"), Eastern (either semi-eastern or full eastern, usually used for backhands), and Western (semi-western or full western, usually for forehand grips) grips. Most players change grips during a match depending on what shot they are hitting; for example, slice shots and serves call for a Continental grip. [92] Serve Roger Federer in a serve motion. A serve (or, more formally, a "service") in tennis is a shot to start a point. The serve is initiated by tossing the ball into the air and hitting it (usually near the apex of its trajectory) into the diagonally opposite service box without touching the net. The serve may be hit under- or overhand although underhand serving remains a rarity. [93] If the ball hits the net on the first serve and bounces over into the correct diagonal box then it is called a "let" and the server gets two more additional serves to get it in. There can also be a let if the server serves the ball and the receiver isn't prepared. [66] If the server misses his or her first serve and gets a let on the second serve, then they get one more try to get the serve in the box. Experienced players strive to master the conventional overhand serve to maximize its power and placement. The server may employ different types of serve including flat serve, topspin serve, slice serve, and kick (American twist) serve. A reverse type of spin serve is hit in a manner that spins the ball opposite the natural spin of the server, the spin direction depending upon right- or left-handedness. If the ball is spinning counterclockwise, it will curve right from the hitter's point of view and curve left if spinning clockwise. [94] Some servers are content to use the serve simply to initiate the point; however, advanced players often try to hit a winning shot with their serve. A winning serve that is not touched by the opponent is called an "ace". Forehand Juan Martín del Potro in a forehand motion. For a right-handed player, the forehand is a stroke that begins on the right side of the body, continues across the body as contact is made with the ball, and ends on the left side of the body. There are various grips for executing the forehand, and their popularity has fluctuated over the years. The most important ones are the continental, the eastern, the semi-western, and the western. For a number of years, the small, frail 1920s player Bill Johnston was considered by many to have had the best forehand of all time, a stroke that he hit shoulder-high using a western grip. Few top players used the western grip after the 1920s, but in the latter part of the 20th century, as shot-making techniques and equipment changed radically, the western forehand made a strong comeback and is now used by many modern players. No matter which grip is used, most forehands are generally executed with one hand holding the racket, but there have been fine players with two-handed forehands. In the 1940s and 50s, the Ecuadorian/American player Pancho Segura used a two-handed forehand to achieve a devastating effect against larger, more powerful players. Players such as Monica Seles or France's Fabrice Santoro and Marion Bartoli are also notable players known for their two-handed forehands. [95] Backhand Main article: Backhand Novak Djokovic in a two-handed backhand motion. For right-handed players, the backhand is a stroke that begins on the left side of their body, continues across their body as contact is made with the ball, and ends on the right side of their body. It can be executed with either one hand or with both and is generally considered more difficult to master than the forehand. For most of the 20th century, the backhand was performed with one hand, using either an eastern or a continental grip. The first notable players to use two hands were the 1930s Australians Vivian McGrath and John Bromwich , but they were lone exceptions. The two-handed grip gained popularity in the 1970s as Björn Borg , Chris Evert , Jimmy Connors , and later Mats Wilander and Marat Safin used it to great effect, and it is now used by a large number of the world's best players, including Novak Djokovic , Rafael Nadal and Serena Williams . [96] Two hands give the player more control, while one hand can generate a slice shot, applying backspin on the ball to produce a low trajectory bounce. Reach is also limited with the two-handed shot. The player long considered to have had the best backhand of all time, Don Budge , had a powerful one-handed stroke in the 1930s and 1940s that imparted topspin onto the ball. Ken Rosewall , another player noted for his one-handed backhand, used a very accurate slice backhand through the 1950s and 1960s. A small number of players, notably Monica Seles , use two hands on both the backhand and forehand sides. Other shots A volley is a shot returned to the opponent in mid-air before the ball bounces, generally performed near the net, and is usually made with a stiff-wristed punching motion to hit the ball into an open area of the opponent's court. The half volley is made by hitting the ball on the rise just after it has bounced, also generally in the vicinity of the net, and played with the racket close to the ground. [97] The swinging volley is hit out of the air as the player approaches the net. It is an offensive shot used to take preparation time away from the opponent, as it returns the ball into the opponent's court much faster than a standard volley. From a poor defensive position on the baseline, the lob can be used as either an offensive or defensive weapon, hitting the ball high and deep into the opponent's court to either enable the lobber to get into better defensive position or to win the point outright by hitting it over the opponent's head. If the lob is not hit deeply enough into the other court, however, an opponent near the net may then hit an overhead smash , a hard, serve-like shot, to try to end the point. A difficult shot in tennis is the return of an attempted lob over the backhand side of a player. When the contact point is higher than the reach of a two-handed backhand, most players will try to execute a high slice (under the ball or sideways). Fewer players attempt the backhand sky-hook or smash. Rarely, a player will go for a high topspin backhand, while themselves in the air. A successful execution of any of these alternatives requires balance and timing, with less margin of error than the lower contact point backhands, since this shot is a break in the regular pattern of play. If their opponent is deep in their court, a player may suddenly employ an unexpected drop shot , by softly tapping the ball just over the net so that the opponent is unable to run in fast enough to retrieve it. Advanced players will often apply back spin to a drop shot, causing the ball to "skid" upon landing and bounce sideways, with less forward momentum toward their opponent, or even backwards towards the net, thus making it even more difficult to return. Tournaments See also: List of tennis tournaments Tournaments are often organized by gender and number of players. Common tournament configurations include men's singles, women's singles, and doubles, where two players play on each side of the net. Tournaments may be organized for specific age groups, with upper age limits for youth and lower age limits for senior players. Example of this include the Orange Bowl and Les Petits As junior tournaments. There are also tournaments for players with disabilities, such as wheelchair tennis and deaf tennis. [98] In the four Grand Slam tournaments, the singles draws are limited to 128 players for each gender. Most large tournaments seed players, but players may also be matched by their skill level. According to how well a person does in sanctioned play, a player is given a rating that is adjusted periodically to maintain competitive matches. For example, the United States Tennis Association administers the National Tennis Rating Program ( NTRP ), which rates players between 1.0 and 7.0 in 1/2 point increments. Average club players under this system would rate 3.0–4.5 while world class players would be 7.0 on this scale. Grand Slam tournaments The four Grand Slam tournaments are considered to be the most prestigious tennis events in the world. They are held annually and comprise, in chronological order, the Australian Open , the French Open , Wimbledon , and the US Open . Apart from the Olympic Games , Davis Cup , Fed Cup , and Hopman Cup , they are the only tournaments regulated by the International Tennis Federation (ITF). [99] The ITF's national associations, Tennis Australia (Australian Open), the Fédération Française de Tennis (French Open), the Lawn Tennis Association (Wimbledon) and the United States Tennis Association (US Open) are delegated the responsibility to organize these events. [99] Aside from the historical significance of these events, they also carry larger prize funds than any other tour event and are worth double the number of ranking points to the champion than in the next echelon of tournaments, the ATP Masters 1000 (men) and Premier events (women). [100] [101] Another distinguishing feature is the number of players in the singles draw. There are 128, more than any other professional tennis tournament. This draw is composed of 32 seeded players, other players ranked in the world's top 100, qualifiers, and players who receive invitations through wild cards . Grand Slam men's tournaments have best-of-five set matches while the women play best-of-three. Grand Slam tournaments are among the small number of events that last two weeks, the others being the Indian Wells Masters and the Miami Masters . Currently, the Grand Slam tournaments are the only tour events that have mixed doubles contests. Grand Slam tournaments are held in conjunction with wheelchair tennis tournaments and junior tennis competitions. These tournaments also contain their own idiosyncrasies. For example, players at Wimbledon are required to wear predominantly white. Andre Agassi chose to skip Wimbledon from 1988 through 1990 citing the event's traditionalism, particularly its "predominantly white" dress code. [102] Wimbledon has its own particular methods for disseminating tickets, often leading tennis fans to follow complex procedures to obtain tickets. [103] Overview of Grand Slam tournaments Grand Slam
Rugby union football Several codes of football Football is a family of team sports that involve, to varying degrees, kicking a ball to score a goal .  Unqualified, the word football normally means the form of football that is the most popular where the word is used. Sports commonly called football include association football (known as soccer in Australia, Canada, South Africa, the United States, and sometimes in Ireland and New Zealand); Australian rules football ; Gaelic football ; gridiron football (specifically American football , Arena football , or Canadian football ); International rules football ; rugby league football ; and rugby union football . [1] These various forms of football share, to varying degrees, common origins and are known as "football codes". There are a number of references to traditional, ancient, or prehistoric ball games played in many different parts of the world. [2] [3] [4] Contemporary codes of football can be traced back to the codification of these games at English public schools during the 19th century, itself an outgrowth of medieval football . [5] [6] The expansion and cultural power of the British Empire allowed these rules of football to spread to areas of British influence outside the directly controlled Empire. [7] By the end of the 19th century, distinct regional codes were already developing: Gaelic football , for example, deliberately incorporated the rules of local traditional football games in order to maintain their heritage. [8] In 1888, the Football League was founded in England, becoming the first of many professional football associations. During the 20th century, several of the various kinds of football grew to become some of the most popular team sports in the world. [9] Common elements The action of kicking in (clockwise from upper left) association, gridiron, rugby, and Australian football The various codes of football share certain common elements and can be grouped into two main classes of football: carrying codes like American football, Canadian football, Australian football, rugby union and rugby league, where the ball is moved about the field while being held in the hands or thrown, and kicking codes such as association football and Gaelic football, where the ball is moved primarily with the feet, and where handling is strictly limited. [10] Common rules among the sports include: [11] Two teams usually have between 11 and 18 players; some variations that have fewer players (five or more per team) are also popular. A clearly defined area in which to play the game. Scoring goals or points by moving the ball to an opposing team's end of the field and either into a goal area, or over a line. Goals or points resulting from players putting the ball between two goalposts . The goal or line being defended by the opposing team. Players using only their body to move the ball, i.e. no additional equipment such as bats or sticks. In all codes, common skills include passing , tackling , evasion of tackles, catching and kicking . [10] In most codes, there are rules restricting the movement of players offside , and players scoring a goal must put the ball either under or over a crossbar between the goalposts. Etymology Main article: Football (word) There are conflicting explanations of the origin of the word "football".  It is widely assumed that the word "football" (or the phrase "foot ball") refers to the action of the foot kicking a ball. [12] There is an alternative explanation, which is that football originally referred to a variety of games in medieval Europe that were played on foot. [13] There is no conclusive evidence for either explanation. Early history See also: Episkyros and Cuju Ancient China A painting depicting Emperor Taizu of Song playing cuju (i.e. Chinese football) with his prime minister Zhao Pu (趙普) and other ministers, by the Yuan dynasty artist Qian Xuan (1235–1305) The Chinese competitive game cuju (蹴鞠) resembles modern association football . [14] It existed during the Han dynasty and possibly the Qin dynasty , in the second and third centuries BC, attested by descriptions in a military manual. [15] [16] The Japanese version of cuju is kemari (蹴鞠), and was developed during the Asuka period . [17] This is known to have been played within the Japanese imperial court in Kyoto from about 600 AD. In kemari, several people stand in a circle and kick a ball to each other, trying not to let the ball drop to the ground (much like keepie uppie ). An ancient Roman tombstone of a boy with a Harpastum ball from Tilurium (modern Sinj , Croatia) Ancient Greece and Rome The Ancient Greeks and Romans are known to have played many ball games, some of which involved the use of the feet. The Roman game harpastum is believed to have been adapted from a Greek team game known as "ἐπίσκυρος" ( Episkyros ) [18] [19] or "φαινίνδα" (phaininda), [20] which is mentioned by a Greek playwright, Antiphanes (388–311 BC) and later referred to by the Christian theologian Clement of Alexandria ( c. 150 – c. 215 AD). These games appear to have resembled rugby football . [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] The Roman politician Cicero (106–43 BC) describes the case of a man who was killed whilst having a shave when a ball was kicked into a barber's shop. Roman ball games already knew the air-filled ball, the follis . [26] [27] Episkyros is described as an early form of football by FIFA. [28] Native Americans There are a number of references to traditional, ancient , or prehistoric ball games, played by indigenous peoples in many different parts of the world. For example, in 1586, men from a ship commanded by an English explorer named John Davis went ashore to play a form of football with Inuit in Greenland. [29] There are later accounts of an Inuit game played on ice, called Aqsaqtuk. Each match began with two teams facing each other in parallel lines, before attempting to kick the ball through each other team's line and then at a goal. In 1610, William Strachey , a colonist at Jamestown, Virginia recorded a game played by Native Americans, called Pahsaheman.[ citation needed ] Pasuckuakohowog , a game similar to modern-day association football played amongst Amerindians , was also reported as early as the 17th century. Games played in Mesoamerica with rubber balls by indigenous peoples are also well-documented as existing since before this time, but these had more similarities to basketball or volleyball , and no links have been found between such games and modern football sports. Northeastern American Indians, especially the Iroquois Confederation, played a game which made use of net racquets to throw and catch a small ball; however, although it is a ball-goal foot game, lacrosse (as its modern descendant is called) is likewise not usually classed as a form of "football".[ citation needed ] Oceania On the Australian continent several tribes of indigenous people played kicking and catching games with stuffed balls which have been generalised by historians as Marn Grook ( Djab Wurrung for "game ball"). The earliest historical account is an anecdote from the 1878 book by Robert Brough-Smyth , The Aborigines of Victoria, in which a man called Richard Thomas is quoted as saying, in about 1841 in Victoria, Australia , that he had witnessed Aboriginal people playing the game: "Mr Thomas describes how the foremost player will drop kick a ball made from the skin of a possum and how other players leap into the air in order to catch it." Some historians have theorised that Marn Grook was one of the origins of Australian rules football . The Māori in New Zealand played a game called Kī-o-rahi consisting of teams of seven players play on a circular field divided into zones, and score points by touching the 'pou' (boundary markers) and hitting a central 'tupu' or target.[ citation needed ] These games and others may well go far back into antiquity. However, the main sources of modern football codes appear to lie in western Europe, especially England. Turkic peoples Mahmud al-Kashgari in his Dīwān Lughāt al-Turk , described a game called "tepuk" among Turks in Central and East Asia . In the game, people try to attack each other's castle by kicking a ball made of sheep leather. [30] Ancient Greek athlete balancing a ball on his thigh, Piraeus , 400–375 BC A Song dynasty painting by Su Hanchen ( c. 1130–1160), depicting Chinese children playing cuju Paint of a Mesoamerican ballgame player of the Tepantitla murals in Teotihuacan A group of indigenous people playing a ball game in French Guiana An illustration from the 1850s of indigenous Australians playing marn grook A revived version of kemari being played at the Tanzan Shrine , Japan, 2006 Medieval and early modern Europe Further information: Medieval football The Middle Ages saw a huge rise in popularity of annual Shrovetide football matches throughout Europe, particularly in England. An early reference to a ball game played in Britain comes from the 9th-century Historia Brittonum , attributed to Nennius , which describes "a party of boys ... playing at ball". [31] References to a ball game played in northern France known as La Soule or Choule, in which the ball was propelled by hands, feet, and sticks, [32] date from the 12th century. [33] An illustration of so-called "mob football" The early forms of football played in England, sometimes referred to as " mob football ", would be played in towns or between neighbouring villages, involving an unlimited number of players on opposing teams who would clash en masse, [34] struggling to move an item, such as inflated animal's bladder [35] to particular geographical points, such as their opponents' church, with play taking place in the open space between neighbouring parishes. [36] The game was played primarily during significant religious festivals, such as Shrovetide, Christmas, or Easter, [35] and Shrovetide games have survived into the modern era in a number of English towns (see below). The first detailed description of what was almost certainly football in England was given by William FitzStephen in about 1174–1183. He described the activities of London youths during the annual festival of Shrove Tuesday : After lunch all the youth of the city go out into the fields to take part in a ball game. The students of each school have their own ball; the workers from each city craft are also carrying their balls. Older citizens, fathers, and wealthy citizens come on horseback to watch their juniors competing, and to relive their own youth vicariously: you can see their inner passions aroused as they watch the action and get caught up in the fun being had by the carefree adolescents. [37] Most of the very early references to the game speak simply of "ball play" or "playing at ball". This reinforces the idea that the games played at the time did not necessarily involve a ball being kicked. An early reference to a ball game that was probably football comes from 1280 at Ulgham , Northumberland, England:  "Henry... while playing at ball.. ran against David". [38] Football was played in Ireland in 1308, with a documented reference to John McCrocan, a spectator at a "football game" at Newcastle, County Down being charged with accidentally stabbing a player named William Bernard. [39] Another reference to a football game comes in 1321 at Shouldham , Norfolk, England: "[d]uring the game at ball as he kicked the ball, a lay friend of his... ran against him and wounded himself". [38] In 1314, Nicholas de Farndone , Lord Mayor of the City of London issued a decree banning football in the French used by the English upper classes at the time. A translation reads: "[f]orasmuch as there is great noise in the city caused by hustling over large foot balls [rageries de grosses pelotes de pee] [40] in the fields of the public from which many evils might arise which God forbid: we command and forbid on behalf of the king, on pain of imprisonment, such game to be used in the city in the future." This is the earliest reference to football. In 1363, King Edward III of England issued a proclamation banning "...handball, football, or hockey; coursing and cock-fighting, or other such idle games", [41] showing that "football" – whatever its exact form in this case – was being differentiated from games involving other parts of the body, such as handball. "Football" in France, circa 1750 A game known as "football" was played in Scotland as early as the 15th century: it was prohibited by the Football Act 1424 and although the law fell into disuse it was not repealed until 1906. There is evidence for schoolboys playing a "football" ball game in Aberdeen in 1633 (some references cite 1636) which is notable as an early allusion to what some have considered to be passing the ball. The word "pass" in the most recent translation is derived from "huc percute" (strike it here) and later "repercute pilam" (strike the ball again) in the original Latin. It is not certain that the ball was being struck between members of the same team. The original word translated as "goal" is "metum", literally meaning the "pillar at each end of the circus course" in a Roman chariot race. There is a reference to "get hold of the ball before [another player] does" (Praeripe illi pilam si possis agere) suggesting that handling of the ball was allowed. One sentence states in the original 1930 translation "Throw yourself against him" (Age, objice te illi). King Henry IV of England also presented one of the earliest documented uses of the English word "football", in 1409, when he issued a proclamation forbidding the levying of money for "foteball". [38] [42] There is also an account in Latin from the end of the 15th century of football being played at Caunton , Nottinghamshire. This is the first description of a "kicking game" and the first description of dribbling : "[t]he game at which they had met for common recreation is called by some the foot-ball game. It is one in which young men, in country sport, propel a huge ball not by throwing it into the air but by striking it and rolling it along the ground, and that not with their hands but with their feet... kicking in opposite directions." The chronicler gives the earliest reference to a football pitch, stating that: "[t]he boundaries have been marked and the game had started. [38] Oldest known painting of foot-ball in Scotland, by Alexander Carse , c. 1810 "Football" in Scotland, c. 1830 Other firsts in the medieval and early modern eras: "A football", in the sense of a ball rather than a game, was first mentioned in 1486. [42] This reference is in Dame Juliana Berners ' Book of St Albans . It states: "a certain rounde instrument to play with ...it is an instrument for the foote and then it is calde in Latyn 'pila pedalis', a fotebal". [38] A pair of football boots were ordered by King Henry VIII of England in 1526. [43] Women playing a form of football was first described in 1580 by Sir Philip Sidney in one of his poems: "[a] tyme there is for all, my mother often sayes, when she, with skirts tuckt very hy, with girles at football playes". [44] The first references to goals are in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. In 1584 and 1602 respectively, John Norden and Richard Carew referred to "goals" in Cornish hurling . Carew described how goals were made: "they pitch two bushes in the ground, some eight or ten foote asunder; and directly against them, ten or twelue [twelve] score off, other twayne in like distance, which they terme their Goales". [45] He is also the first to describe goalkeepers and passing of the ball between players. The first direct reference to scoring a goal is in John Day 's play The Blind Beggar of Bethnal Green (performed circa 1600; published 1659): "I'll play a gole at camp-ball " (an extremely violent variety of football, which was popular in East Anglia ). Similarly in a poem in 1613, Michael Drayton refers to "when the Ball to throw, and drive it to the Gole, in squadrons forth they goe". Calcio Fiorentino Main article: Calcio Fiorentino An illustration of the Calcio Fiorentino field and starting positions, from a 1688 book by Pietro di Lorenzo Bini In the 16th century, the city of Florence celebrated the period between Epiphany and Lent by playing a game which today is known as "calcio storico" ("historic kickball") in the Piazza Santa Croce . [46] The young aristocrats of the city would dress up in fine silk costumes and embroil themselves in a violent form of football. For example, calcio players could punch, shoulder charge, and kick opponents. Blows below the belt were allowed. The game is said to have originated as a military training exercise. In 1580, Count Giovanni de' Bardi di Vernio wrote Discorso sopra 'l giuoco del Calcio Fiorentino. This is sometimes said to be the earliest code of rules for any football game. The game was not played after January 1739 (until it was revived in May 1930). Official disapproval and attempts to ban football Main article: Attempts to ban football games There have been many attempts to ban football, from the Middle Ages through to the modern day. The first such law was passed in England in 1314; it was followed by more than 30 in England alone between 1314 and 1667. [47] : 6 Women were banned from playing at English and Scottish Football League grounds in 1921, a ban that was only lifted in the 1970s. Female footballers still face similar problems in some parts of the world. American football also faced pressures to ban the sport.  The game played in the 19th century resembled mob football that developed in medieval Europe, including a version popular on university campuses known as old division football , and several municipalities banned its play in the mid-19th century. [48] [49] By the 20th century, the game had evolved to a more rugby style game.  In 1905, there were calls to ban American football in the U.S. due to its violence; a meeting that year was hosted by American president Theodore Roosevelt led to sweeping rules changes that caused the sport to diverge significantly from its rugby roots to become more like the sport as it is played today. [50] Establishment of modern codes Main article: English public school football games While football continued to be played in various forms throughout Britain, its public schools (equivalent to private schools in other countries) are widely credited with four key achievements in the creation of modern football codes. First of all, the evidence suggests that they were important in taking football away from its "mob" form and turning it into an organised team sport. Second, many early descriptions of football and references to it were recorded by people who had studied at these schools. Third, it was teachers, students, and former students from these schools who first codified football games, to enable matches to be played between schools. Finally, it was at English public schools that the division between "kicking" and "running" (or "carrying") games first became clear. The earliest evidence that games resembling football were being played at English public schools – mainly attended by boys from the upper, upper-middle and professional classes – comes from the Vulgaria by William Herman in 1519. Herman had been headmaster at Eton and Winchester colleges and his Latin textbook includes a translation exercise with the phrase "We wyll playe with a ball full of wynde". [51] Richard Mulcaster , a student at Eton College in the early 16th century and later headmaster at other English schools, has been described as "the greatest sixteenth Century advocate of football". [52] Among his contributions are the earliest evidence of organised team football. Mulcaster's writings refer to teams ("sides" and "parties"), positions ("standings"), a referee ("judge over the parties") and a coach "(trayning maister)". Mulcaster's "footeball" had evolved from the disordered and violent forms of traditional football: [s]ome smaller number with such overlooking, sorted into sides and standings, not meeting with their bodies so boisterously to trie their strength: nor shouldring or shuffing one an other so barbarously ... may use footeball for as much good to the body, by the chiefe use of the legges. [53] In 1633, David Wedderburn , a teacher from Aberdeen , mentioned elements of modern football games in a short Latin textbook called Vocabula. Wedderburn refers to what has been translated into modern English as "keeping goal" and makes an allusion to passing the ball ("strike it here"). There is a reference to "get hold of the ball", suggesting that some handling was allowed. It is clear that the tackles allowed included the charging and holding of opposing players ("drive that man back"). [54] A more detailed description of football is given in Francis Willughby 's Book of Games, written in about 1660. [55] Willughby, who had studied at Bishop Vesey's Grammar School , Sutton Coldfield , is the first to describe goals and a distinct playing field: "a close that has a gate at either end. The gates are called Goals." His book includes a diagram illustrating a football field. He also mentions tactics ("leaving some of their best players to guard the goal"); scoring ("they that can strike the ball through their opponents' goal first win") and the way teams were selected ("the players being equally divided according to their strength and nimbleness"). He is the first to describe a "law" of football: "they must not strike [an opponent's leg] higher than the ball". [56] [57] English public schools were the first to codify football games. In particular, they devised the first offside rules, during the late 18th century. [58] In the earliest manifestations of these rules, players were "off their side" if they simply stood between the ball and the goal which was their objective. Players were not allowed to pass the ball forward, either by foot or by hand. They could only dribble with their feet, or advance the ball in a scrum or similar formation. However, offside laws began to diverge and develop differently at each school, as is shown by the rules of football from Winchester, Rugby , Harrow and Cheltenham , during between 1810 and 1850. [58] The first known codes – in the sense of a set of rules – were those of Eton in 1815 [59] and Aldenham in 1825. [59] ) During the early 19th century, most working-class people in Britain had to work six days a week, often for over twelve hours a day. They had neither the time nor the inclination to engage in sport for recreation and, at the time, many children were part of the labour force . Feast day football played on the streets was in decline. Public school boys, who enjoyed some freedom from work, became the inventors of organised football games with formal codes of rules. Football was adopted by a number of public schools as a way of encouraging competitiveness and keeping youths fit. Each school drafted its own rules, which varied widely between different schools and were changed over time with each new intake of pupils. Two schools of thought developed regarding rules. Some schools favoured a game in which the ball could be carried (as at Rugby, Marlborough and Cheltenham), while others preferred a game where kicking and dribbling the ball was promoted (as at Eton, Harrow, Westminster and Charterhouse ). The division into these two camps was partly the result of circumstances in which the games were played. For example, Charterhouse and Westminster at the time had restricted playing areas; the boys were confined to playing their ball game within the school cloisters , making it difficult for them to adopt rough and tumble running games.[ citation needed ] Although the Rugby School (pictured) became famous due to a version that rugby football was invented there in 1823, most sports historians refuse this version stating it is apocryphal. William Webb Ellis , a pupil at Rugby School, is said to have "with a fine disregard for the rules of football, as played in his time [emphasis added], first took the ball in his arms and ran with it, thus creating the distinctive feature of the rugby game." in 1823. This act is usually said to be the beginning of Rugby football, but there is little evidence that it occurred, and most sports historians believe the story to be apocryphal. The act of 'taking the ball in his arms' is often misinterpreted as 'picking the ball up' as it is widely believed that Webb Ellis' 'crime' was handling the ball, as in modern association football, however handling the ball at the time was often permitted and in some cases compulsory, [60] the rule for which Webb Ellis showed disregard was running forward with it as the rules of his time only allowed a player to retreat backwards or kick forwards. The boom in rail transport in Britain during the 1840s meant that people were able to travel farther and with less inconvenience than they ever had before. Inter-school sporting competitions became possible. However, it was difficult for schools to play each other at football, as each school played by its own rules. The solution to this problem was usually that the match be divided into two-halves, one half played by the rules of the host "home" school, and the other half by the visiting "away" school. The modern rules of many football codes were formulated during the mid- or late- 19th century. This also applies to other sports such as lawn bowls, lawn tennis, etc. The major impetus for this was the patenting of the world's first lawnmower in 1830. This allowed for the preparation of modern ovals, playing fields, pitches, grass courts, etc. [61] Apart from Rugby football, the public school codes have barely been played beyond the confines of each school's playing fields. However, many of them are still played at the schools which created them (see § British schools ). A Football Game (1839) by British painter Thomas Webster Public schools' dominance of sports in the UK began to wane after the Factory Act of 1850 , which significantly increased the recreation time available to working class children. Before 1850, many British children had to work six days a week, for more than twelve hours a day. From 1850, they could not work before 6 a.m. (7 a.m. in winter) or after 6 p.m. on weekdays (7 p.m. in winter); on Saturdays they had to cease work at 2 pm. These changes meant that working class children had more time for games, including various forms of football. The earliest known matches between public schools are as follows: Football match in the 1846 Shrove Tuesday in Kingston upon Thames , England 9 December 1834: Eton School v. Harrow School. [62] 1840s: Old Rugbeians v. Old Salopians (played at Cambridge University). [63] 1840s: Old Rugbeians v. Old Salopians (played at Cambridge University the following year). [63] 1852: Harrow School v. Westminster School. [63] 1857: Haileybury School v. Westminster School. [63] 24 February 1858: Forest School v. Chigwell School . [64] 1858: Westminster School v. Winchester College. [63] 1859: Harrow School v. Westminster School. [63] 19 November 1859: Radley College v. Old Wykehamists. [63] 1 December 1859: Old Marlburians v. Old Rugbeians (played at Christ Church, Oxford). [63] 19 December 1859: Old Harrovians v. Old Wykehamists (played at Christ Church, Oxford). [63] Firsts
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Team sport This article is about the sport. For the ball used in the sport, see Basketball (ball) . For other uses, see Basketball (disambiguation) . Basketball Chris Dudley (#22), playing for the New Jersey Nets , squares off with Michael Jordan (#23), of the Chicago Bulls on March 28, 1991. Other players including Chicago's Bill Cartwright (#24) are present on the court. December 21, 1891; 132 years ago (1891-12-21). Springfield, Massachusetts , U.S. Characteristics Indoor court (mainly) or outdoor court ( Streetball ) Glossary Yes Olympic pictogram for basketball Basketball is a team sport in which two teams, most commonly of five players each, opposing one another on a rectangular court , compete with the primary objective of shooting a basketball (approximately 9.4 inches (24 cm) in diameter) through the defender's hoop (a basket 18 inches (46 cm) in diameter mounted 10 feet (3.048 m) high to a backboard at each end of the court), while preventing the opposing team from shooting through their own hoop. A field goal is worth two points, unless made from behind the three-point line , when it is worth three. After a foul, timed play stops and the player fouled or designated to shoot a technical foul is given one, two or three one-point free throws . The team with the most points at the end of the game wins, but if regulation play expires with the score tied, an additional period of play ( overtime ) is mandated. Players advance the ball by bouncing it while walking or running (dribbling) or by passing it to a teammate, both of which require considerable skill. On offense, players may use a variety of shots – the layup , the jump shot , or a dunk ; on defense, they may steal the ball from a dribbler, intercept passes, or block shots; either offense or defense may collect a rebound , that is, a missed shot that bounces from rim or backboard. It is a violation to lift or drag one's pivot foot without dribbling the ball , to carry it, or to hold the ball with both hands then resume dribbling . The five players on each side fall into five playing positions . The tallest player is usually the center , the second-tallest and strongest is the power forward , a slightly shorter but more agile player is the small forward , and the shortest players or the best ball handlers are the shooting guard and the point guard , who implement the coach's game plan by managing the execution of offensive and defensive plays (player positioning). Informally, players may play three-on-three, two-on-two, and one-on-one. Invented in 1891 by Canadian-American gym teacher James Naismith in Springfield, Massachusetts , in the United States, basketball has evolved to become one of the world's most popular and widely viewed sports. [1] [2] The National Basketball Association (NBA) is the most significant professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition [3] [4] (drawing most of its talent from U.S. college basketball ). Outside North America, the top clubs from national leagues qualify to continental championships such as the EuroLeague and the Basketball Champions League Americas . The FIBA Basketball World Cup and Men's Olympic Basketball Tournament are the major international events of the sport and attract top national teams from around the world. Each continent hosts regional competitions for national teams, like EuroBasket and FIBA AmeriCup . The FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup and Women's Olympic Basketball Tournament feature top national teams from continental championships. The main North American league is the WNBA ( NCAA Women's Division I Basketball Championship is also popular), whereas the strongest European clubs participate in the EuroLeague Women . History Main article: History of basketball Early history A game similar to basketball is mentioned in a 1591 book published in Frankfurt am Main that reports on the lifestyles and customs of coastal North American residents, Wahrhafftige Abconterfaytung der Wilden. [5] Among other things, a game of skill is described in which balls must be thrown against a target woven from twigs, mounted high on a pole. There's a small reward for the player if the target is being hit. [6] Creation James Naismith c. 1920 In December 1891, James Naismith , a Canadian-American professor of physical education and instructor at the International Young Men's Christian Association Training School (now Springfield College ) in Springfield, Massachusetts , [7] was trying to keep his gym class active on a rainy day. [8] He sought a vigorous indoor game to keep his students occupied and at proper levels of fitness during the long New England winters. After rejecting other ideas as either too rough or poorly suited to walled-in gymnasiums , he invented a new game in which players would pass a ball to teammates and try to score points by tossing the ball into a basket mounted on a wall. Naismith wrote the basic rules and nailed a peach basket onto an elevated track. Naismith initially set up the peach basket with its bottom intact, which meant that the ball had to be retrieved manually after each "basket" or point scored. This quickly proved tedious, so Naismith removed the bottom of the basket to allow the balls to be poked out with a long dowel after each scored basket. The first basketball court: Springfield College Old-style basketball with laces Shortly after, Senda Berenson , instructor of physical culture at the nearby Smith College , went to Naismith to learn more about the game. [9] Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach, she started to organize games with her pupils, following adjusted rules. [10] The first official women's interinstitutional game was played barely 11 months later, between the University of California and the Miss Head's School. [11] In 1899, a committee was established at the Conference of Physical Training in Springfield to draw up general rules for women's basketball. Thus, the sport quickly spread throughout America's schools, colleges and universities with uniform rules for both sexes. [12] Basketball was originally played with a soccer ball . These round balls from " association football " were made, at the time, with a set of laces to close off the hole needed for inserting the inflatable bladder after the other sewn-together segments of the ball's cover had been flipped outside-in. [13] [14] These laces could cause bounce passes and dribbling to be unpredictable. [15] Eventually a lace-free ball construction method was invented, and this change to the game was endorsed by Naismith (whereas in American football , the lace construction proved to be advantageous for gripping and remains to this day). The first balls made specifically for basketball were brown, and it was only in the late 1950s that Tony Hinkle , searching for a ball that would be more visible to players and spectators alike, introduced the orange ball that is now in common use. Dribbling was not part of the original game except for the "bounce pass" to teammates. Passing the ball was the primary means of ball movement. Dribbling was eventually introduced but limited by the asymmetric shape of early balls.[ dubious – discuss ] Dribbling was common by 1896, with a rule against the double dribble by 1898. [16] The peach baskets were used until 1906 when they were finally replaced by metal hoops with backboards. A further change was soon made, so the ball merely passed through. Whenever a person got the ball in the basket, his team would gain a point. Whichever team got the most points won the game. [17] The baskets were originally nailed to the mezzanine balcony of the playing court, but this proved impractical when spectators in the balcony began to interfere with shots. The backboard was introduced to prevent this interference; it had the additional effect of allowing rebound shots. [18] Naismith's handwritten diaries, discovered by his granddaughter in early 2006, indicate that he was nervous about the new game he had invented, which incorporated rules from a children's game called duck on a rock , as many had failed before it. [19] Frank Mahan, one of the players from the original first game, approached Naismith after the Christmas break, in early 1892, asking him what he intended to call his new game. Naismith replied that he had not thought of it because he had been focused on just getting the game started. Mahan suggested that it be called "Naismith ball", at which he laughed, saying that a name like that would kill any game. Mahan then said, "Why not call it basketball?" Naismith replied, "We have a basket and a ball, and it seems to me that would be a good name for it." [20] [21] The first official game was played in the YMCA gymnasium in Albany , New York, on January 20, 1892, with nine players. The game ended at 1–0; the shot was made from 25 feet (7.6 m), on a court just half the size of a present-day Streetball or National Basketball Association (NBA) court. At the time, soccer was being played with 10 to a team (which was increased to 11). When winter weather got too icy to play soccer, teams were taken indoors, and it was convenient to have them split in half and play basketball with five on each side. By 1897–98, teams of five became standard. College basketball Main article: College basketball The 1899 University of Kansas basketball team, with James Naismith at the back, right Basketball's early adherents were dispatched to YMCAs throughout the United States, and it quickly spread through the United States and Canada. By 1895, it was well established at several women's high schools. While YMCA was responsible for initially developing and spreading the game, within a decade it discouraged the new sport, as rough play and rowdy crowds began to detract from YMCA's primary mission. However, other amateur sports clubs, colleges, and professional clubs quickly filled the void. In the years before World War I , the Amateur Athletic Union and the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (forerunner of the NCAA ) vied for control over the rules for the game. The first pro league, the National Basketball League, was formed in 1898 to protect players from exploitation and to promote a less rough game. This league only lasted five years. James Naismith was instrumental in establishing college basketball . His colleague C. O. Beamis fielded the first college basketball team just a year after the Springfield YMCA game at the suburban Pittsburgh Geneva College . [22] Naismith himself later coached at the University of Kansas for six years, before handing the reins to renowned coach Forrest "Phog" Allen . Naismith's disciple Amos Alonzo Stagg brought basketball to the University of Chicago , while Adolph Rupp , a student of Naismith's at Kansas, enjoyed great success as coach at the University of Kentucky . On February 9, 1895, the first intercollegiate 5-on-5 game was played at Hamline University between Hamline and the School of Agriculture, which was affiliated with the University of Minnesota . [23] [24] [25] The School of Agriculture won in a 9–3 game. In 1901, colleges, including the University of Chicago , Columbia University , Cornell University , Dartmouth College , the University of Minnesota , the U.S. Naval Academy , the University of Colorado and Yale University began sponsoring men's games. In 1905, frequent injuries on the football field prompted President Theodore Roosevelt to suggest that colleges form a governing body, resulting in the creation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (IAAUS). In 1910, that body changed its name to the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). The first Canadian interuniversity basketball game was played at YMCA in Kingston , Ontario on February 6, 1904, when McGill University – Naismith's alma mater – visited Queen's University . McGill won 9–7 in overtime; the score was 7–7 at the end of regulation play, and a ten-minute overtime period settled the outcome. A good turnout of spectators watched the game. [26] The first men's national championship tournament, the National Association of Intercollegiate Basketball tournament, which still exists as the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) tournament , was organized in 1937. The first national championship for NCAA teams, the National Invitation Tournament (NIT) in New York, was organized in 1938; the NCAA national tournament began one year later. College basketball was rocked by gambling scandals from 1948 to 1951 , when dozens of players from top teams were implicated in match fixing and point shaving . Partially spurred by an association with cheating, the NIT lost support to the NCAA tournament. High school basketball A basketball game between the Heart Mountain and Powell High School girls teams, Wyoming, March 1944 Before widespread school district consolidation, most American high schools were far smaller than their present-day counterparts. During the first decades of the 20th century, basketball quickly became the ideal interscholastic sport due to its modest equipment and personnel requirements. In the days before widespread television coverage of professional and college sports, the popularity of high school basketball was unrivaled in many parts of America. Perhaps the most legendary of high school teams was Indiana's Franklin Wonder Five , which took the nation by storm during the 1920s, dominating Indiana basketball and earning national recognition. Today virtually every high school in the United States fields a basketball team in varsity competition. [27] Basketball's popularity remains high, both in rural areas where they carry the identification of the entire community, as well as at some larger schools known for their basketball teams where many players go on to participate at higher levels of competition after graduation. In the 2016–17 season, 980,673 boys and girls represented their schools in interscholastic basketball competition, according to the National Federation of State High School Associations . [28] The states of Illinois , Indiana and Kentucky are particularly well known for their residents' devotion to high school basketball, commonly called Hoosier Hysteria in Indiana; the critically acclaimed film Hoosiers shows high school basketball's depth of meaning to these communities. High School of Montreal Girls Junior Basketball team, 1915–1916 ⁣There is currently no tournament to determine a national high school champion. The most serious effort was the National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament at the University of Chicago from 1917 to 1930. The event was organized by Amos Alonzo Stagg and sent invitations to state champion teams. The tournament started out as a mostly Midwest affair but grew. In 1929 it had 29 state champions. Faced with opposition from the National Federation of State High School Associations and North Central Association of Colleges and Schools that bore a threat of the schools losing their accreditation the last tournament was in 1930. The organizations said they were concerned that the tournament was being used to recruit professional players from the prep ranks. [29] The tournament did not invite minority schools or private/parochial schools. The National Catholic Interscholastic Basketball Tournament ran from 1924 to 1941 at Loyola University . [30] The National Catholic Invitational Basketball Tournament from 1954 to 1978 played at a series of venues, including Catholic University , Georgetown and George Mason . [31] The National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament for Black High Schools was held from 1929 to 1942 at Hampton Institute . [32] The National Invitational Interscholastic Basketball Tournament was held from 1941 to 1967 starting out at Tuskegee Institute . Following a pause during World War II it resumed at Tennessee State College in Nashville. The basis for the champion dwindled after 1954 when Brown v. Board of Education began an integration of schools. The last tournaments were held at Alabama State College from 1964 to 1967. [33] Professional basketball Ad from The Liberator magazine promoting an exhibition in Harlem, March 1922. Drawing by Hugo Gellert Teams abounded throughout the 1920s. There were hundreds of men's professional basketball teams in towns and cities all over the United States, and little organization of the professional game. Players jumped from team to team and teams played in armories and smoky dance halls. Leagues came and went. Barnstorming squads such as the Original Celtics and two all-African American teams, the New York Renaissance Five ("Rens") and the (still existing) Harlem Globetrotters played up to two hundred games a year on their national tours. In 1946, the Basketball Association of America (BAA) was formed. The first game was played in Toronto , Ontario, Canada between the Toronto Huskies and New York Knickerbockers on November 1, 1946. Three seasons later, in 1949, the BAA merged with the National Basketball League (NBL) to form the National Basketball Association (NBA). By the 1950s, basketball had become a major college sport, thus paving the way for a growth of interest in professional basketball. In 1959, a basketball hall of fame was founded in Springfield , Massachusetts, site of the first game. Its rosters include the names of great players, coaches, referees and people who have contributed significantly to the development of the game. The hall of fame has people who have accomplished many goals in their career in basketball. An upstart organization, the American Basketball Association , emerged in 1967 and briefly threatened the NBA's dominance until the ABA-NBA merger in 1976. Today the NBA is the top professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition. Diamond DeShields (#1) drives to the basket around Maya Moore (#23) in the Minnesota Lynx vs Chicago Sky game The NBA has featured many famous players, including George Mikan , the first dominating "big man"; ball-handling wizard Bob Cousy and defensive genius Bill Russell of the Boston Celtics ; charismatic center Wilt Chamberlain , who originally played for the barnstorming Harlem Globetrotters ; all-around stars Oscar Robertson and Jerry West ; more recent big men Kareem Abdul-Jabbar , Shaquille O'Neal , Hakeem Olajuwon and Karl Malone ; playmakers John Stockton , Isiah Thomas and Steve Nash ; crowd-pleasing forwards Julius Erving and Charles Barkley ; European stars Dirk Nowitzki , Pau Gasol and Tony Parker ; Latin American stars Manu Ginobili , more recent superstars, Allen Iverson , Kobe Bryant , Tim Duncan , LeBron James , Stephen Curry , Giannis Antetokounmpo , etc.; and the three players who many credit with ushering the professional game to its highest level of popularity during the 1980s and 1990s: Larry Bird , Earvin "Magic" Johnson , and Michael Jordan . In 2001, the NBA formed a developmental league, the National Basketball Development League (later known as the NBA D-League and then the NBA G League after a branding deal with Gatorade ). As of the 2023–24 season, the G League has 31 teams. International basketball The U.S. playing against Mexico at the 2014 FIBA World Cup FIBA (International Basketball Federation) was formed in 1932 by eight founding nations: Argentina , Czechoslovakia , Greece , Italy , Latvia , Portugal , Romania and Switzerland . At this time, the organization only oversaw amateur players. Its acronym, derived from the French Fédération Internationale de Basket-ball Amateur, was thus "FIBA". Men's basketball was first included at the Berlin 1936 Summer Olympics , although a demonstration tournament was held in 1904. The United States defeated Canada in the first final, played outdoors. This competition has usually been dominated by the United States, whose team has won all but three titles. The first of these came in a controversial final game in Munich in 1972 against the Soviet Union, in which the ending of the game was replayed three times until the Soviet Union finally came out on top. [34] In 1950 the first FIBA World Championship for men, now known as the FIBA Basketball World Cup , was held in Argentina. Three years later, the first FIBA World Championship for women, now known as the FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup , was held in Chile. Women's basketball was added to the Olympics in 1976, which were held in Montreal , Quebec, Canada with teams such as the Soviet Union , Brazil and Australia rivaling the American squads. In 1989, FIBA allowed professional NBA players to participate in the Olympics for the first time. Prior to the 1992 Summer Olympics , only European and South American teams were allowed to field professionals in the Olympics. The United States' dominance continued with the introduction of the original Dream Team . In the 2004 Athens Olympics , the United States suffered its first Olympic loss while using professional players, falling to Puerto Rico (in a 19-point loss) and Lithuania in group games, and being eliminated in the semifinals by Argentina . It eventually won the bronze medal defeating Lithuania, finishing behind Argentina and Italy . The Redeem Team , won gold at the 2008 Olympics , and the B-Team, won gold at the 2010 FIBA World Championship in Turkey despite featuring no players from the 2008 squad. The United States continued its dominance as they won gold at the 2012 Olympics , 2014 FIBA World Cup and the 2016 Olympics . A EuroLeague game in Moscow in 2018 Worldwide, basketball tournaments are held for boys and girls of all age levels. The global popularity of the sport is reflected in the nationalities represented in the NBA. Players from all six inhabited continents currently play in the NBA. Top international players began coming into the NBA in the mid-1990s, including Croatians Dražen Petrović and Toni Kukoč , Serbian Vlade Divac , Lithuanians Arvydas Sabonis and Šarūnas Marčiulionis , Dutchman Rik Smits and German Detlef Schrempf . In the Philippines, the Philippine Basketball Association 's first game was played on April 9, 1975, at the Araneta Coliseum in Cubao , Quezon City , Philippines. It was founded as a "rebellion" of several teams from the now-defunct Manila Industrial and Commercial Athletic Association, which was tightly controlled by the Basketball Association of the Philippines (now defunct), the then-FIBA recognized national association. Nine teams from the MICAA participated in the league's first season that opened on April 9, 1975. The NBL is Australia's pre-eminent men's professional basketball league. The league commenced in 1979 , playing a winter season (April–September) and did so until the completion of the 20th season in 1998 . The 1998–99 season, which commenced only months later, was the first season after the shift to the current summer season format (October–April). This shift was an attempt to avoid competing directly against Australia's various football codes . It features 8 teams from around Australia and one in New Zealand. A few players including Luc Longley , Andrew Gaze , Shane Heal , Chris Anstey and Andrew Bogut made it big internationally, becoming poster figures for the sport in Australia. The Women's National Basketball League began in 1981. Women's basketball The Australian women's basketball team on winning the 2006 FIBA World Championship for Women Women began to play basketball in the fall of 1892 at Smith College through Senda Berenson , substitute director of the newly opened gymnasium and physical education teacher, after having modified the rules for women. Shortly after Berenson was hired at Smith, she visited Naismith to learn more about the game. [9] Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach, she instantly introduced the game as a class exercise and soon after teams were organized. The first women's collegiate basketball game was played on March 21, 1893, when her Smith freshmen and sophomores played against one another. [10] [35] The first official women's interinstitutional game was played later that year between the University of California and the Miss Head's School. [11] In 1899, a committee was established at the Conference of Physical Training in Springfield to draw up general rules for women's basketball. [36] These rules, designed by Berenson, were published in 1899. [12] In 1902 Berenson became the editor of A. G. Spalding 's first Women's Basketball Guide. [10] The same year women of Mount Holyoke and Sophie Newcomb College (coached by Clara Gregory Baer ), began playing basketball. By 1895, the game had spread to colleges across the country, including Wellesley , Vassar , and Bryn Mawr . The first intercollegiate women's game was on April 4, 1896. Stanford women played Berkeley , 9-on-9, ending in a 2–1 Stanford victory. Women's basketball development was more structured than that for men in the early years. In 1905, the executive committee on Basket Ball Rules (National Women's Basketball Committee) was created by the American Physical Education Association . [37] These rules called for six to nine players per team and 11 officials. The International Women's Sports Federation (1924) included a women's basketball competition. 37 women's high school varsity basketball or state tournaments were held by 1925. And in 1926, the Amateur Athletic Union backed the first national women's basketball championship , complete with men's rules. [37] The Edmonton Grads , a touring Canadian women's team based in Edmonton , Alberta, operated between 1915 and 1940. The Grads toured all over North America, and were exceptionally successful. They posted a record of 522 wins and only 20 losses over that span, as they met any team that wanted to challenge them, funding their tours from gate receipts. [38] The Grads also shone on several exhibition trips to Europe, and won four consecutive exhibition Olympics tournaments, in 1924, 1928, 1932, and 1936; however, women's basketball was not an official Olympic sport until 1976. The Grads' players were unpaid, and had to remain single. The Grads' style focused on team play, without overly emphasizing skills of individual players. The first women's AAU All-America team was chosen in 1929. [37] Women's industrial leagues sprang up throughout the United States, producing famous athletes, including Babe Didrikson of the Golden Cyclones , and the All American Red Heads Team , which competed against men's teams, using men's rules. By 1938, the women's national championship changed from a three-court game to two-court game with six players per team . [37] Brittney Griner accepting an award The NBA-backed Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) began in 1997. Though it had shaky attendance figures, several marquee players ( Lisa Leslie , Diana Taurasi , and Candace Parker among others) have helped the league's popularity and level of competition. Other professional women's basketball leagues in the United States, such as the American Basketball League (1996–98) , have folded in part because of the popularity of the WNBA. The WNBA has been looked at by many as a niche league. However, the league has recently taken steps forward. In June 2007, the WNBA signed a contract extension with ESPN . The new television deal ran from 2009 to 2016. Along with this deal, came the first-ever rights fees to be paid to a women's professional sports league. Over the eight years of the contract, "millions and millions of dollars" were "dispersed to the league's teams." In a March 12, 2009, article, NBA commissioner David Stern said that in the bad economy, "the NBA is far less profitable than the WNBA. We're losing a lot of money among a large number of teams. We're budgeting the WNBA to break even this year." [39] Rules and regulations End of a match as the game clock shows no time left Most important terms related to the basketball court Main article: Rules of basketball Measurements and time limits discussed in this section often vary among tournaments and organizations; international and NBA rules are used in this section. The object of the game is to outscore one's opponents by throwing the ball through the opponents' basket from above while preventing the opponents from doing so on their own. An attempt to score in this way is called a shot. A successful shot is worth two points, or three points if it is taken from beyond the three-point arc 6.75 metres (22 ft 2 in) from the basket in international games [40] and 23 feet 9 inches (7.24 m) in NBA games. [41] A one-point shot can be earned when shooting from the foul line after a foul is made. After a team has scored from a field goal or free throw, play is resumed with a throw-in awarded to the non-scoring team taken from a point beyond the endline of the court where the points were scored. [42] Playing regulations Games are played in four quarters of 10 ( FIBA ) [43] or 12 minutes (NBA). [44] College men's games use two 20-minute halves, [45] college women's games use 10-minute quarters, [46] and most United States high school varsity games use 8-minute quarters; however, this varies from state to state. [47] [48] 15 minutes are allowed for a half-time break under FIBA, NBA, and NCAA rules [45] [49] [50] and 10 minutes in United States high schools. [47] Overtime periods are five minutes in length [45] [51] [52] except for high school, which is four minutes in length. [47] Teams exchange baskets for the second half. The time allowed is actual playing time; the clock is stopped while the play is not active. Therefore, games generally take much longer to complete than the allotted game time, typically about two hours. Five players from each team may be on the court at one time. [53] [54] [55] [56] Substitutions are unlimited but can only be done when play is stopped. Teams also have a coach, who oversees the development and strategies of the team, and other team personnel such as assistant coaches, managers, statisticians, doctors and trainers. For both men's and women's teams, a standard uniform consists of a pair of shorts and a jersey with a clearly visible number, unique within the team, printed on both the front and back. Players wear high-top sneakers that provide extra ankle support. Typically, team names, players' names and, outside of North America, sponsors are printed on the uniforms. A limited number of time-outs, clock stoppages requested by a coach (or sometimes mandated in the NBA) for a short meeting with the players, are allowed. They generally last no longer than one minute (100 seconds in the NBA) unless, for televised games, a commercial break is needed. The game is controlled by the officials consisting of the referee (referred to as crew chief in the NBA), one or two umpires (referred to as referees in the NBA) and the table officials. For college, the NBA, and many high schools, there are a total of three referees on the court. The table officials are responsible for keeping track of each team's scoring, timekeeping, individual and team fouls , player substitutions, team possession arrow , and the shot clock . Equipment Traditional eight-panel basketball The only essential equipment in a basketball game is the ball and the court: a flat, rectangular surface with baskets at opposite ends. Competitive levels require the use of more equipment such as clocks, score sheets, scoreboards, alternating possession arrows, and whistle-operated stop-clock systems. An outdoor basketball net A regulation basketball court in international games is 28 meters (92 feet) long and 15 meters (49 feet) wide. In the NBA and NCAA the court is 94 by 50 feet (29 by 15 meters). [41] Most courts have wood flooring , usually constructed from maple planks running in the same direction as the longer court dimension. [57] [58] The name and logo of the home team is usually painted on or around the center circle. The basket is a steel rim 18 inches (46 cm) diameter with an attached net affixed to a backboard that measures 6 by 3.5 feet (1.8 by 1.1 meters) and one basket is at each end of the court. The white outlined box on the backboard is 18 inches (46 cm) high and 2 feet (61 cm) wide. At almost all levels of competition, the top of the rim is exactly 10 feet (3.05 meters) above the court and 4 feet (1.22 meters) inside the baseline. While variation is possible in the dimensions of the court and backboard, it is considered important for the basket to be of the correct height – a rim that is off by just a few inches can have an adverse effect on shooting. The net must "check the ball momentarily as it passes through the basket" to aid the visual confirmation that the ball went through. [59] The act of checking the ball has the further advantage of slowing down the ball so the rebound does not go as far. [60] The size of the basketball is also regulated. For men, the official ball is 29.5 inches (75 cm) in circumference (size 7, or a "295 ball") and weighs 22 oz (620 g). If women are playing, the official basketball size is 28.5 inches (72 cm) in circumference (size 6, or a "285 ball") with a weight of 20 oz (570 g). In 3x3 , a formalized version of the halfcourt 3-on-3 game, a dedicated ball with the circumference of a size 6 ball but the weight of a size 7 ball is used in all competitions (men's, women's, and mixed teams). [61] Violations Main article: Violation (basketball) The ball may be advanced toward the basket by being shot, passed between players, thrown, tapped, rolled or dribbled (bouncing the ball while running). The ball must stay within the court; the last team to touch the ball before it travels out of bounds forfeits possession. The ball is out of bounds if it touches a boundary line, or touches any player or object that is out of bounds. There are limits placed on the steps a player may take without dribbling, which commonly results in an infraction known as traveling . Nor may a player stop their dribble and then resume dribbling. A dribble that touches both hands is considered stopping the dribble, giving this infraction the name double dribble . Within a dribble, the player cannot carry the ball by placing their hand on the bottom of the ball; doing so is known as carrying the ball . A team, once having established ball control in the front half of their court, may not return the ball to the backcourt and be the first to touch it. A violation of these rules results in loss of possession. The ball may not be kicked, nor be struck with the fist. For the offense, a violation of these rules results in loss of possession; for the defense, most leagues reset the shot clock and the offensive team is given possession of the ball out of bounds. There are limits imposed on the time taken before progressing the ball past halfway (8 seconds in FIBA and the NBA; 10 seconds in NCAA and high school for both sexes), before attempting a shot (24 seconds in FIBA, the NBA, and U Sports (Canadian universities) play for both sexes, and 30 seconds in NCAA play for both sexes), holding the ball while closely guarded (5 seconds), and remaining in the restricted area known as the free-throw lane, (or the " key ") (3 seconds). These rules are designed to promote more offense. There are also limits on how players may block an opponent's field goal attempt or help a teammate's field goal attempt. Goaltending is a defender's touching of a ball that is on a downward flight toward the basket, while the related violation of basket interference is the touching of a ball that is on the rim or above the basket, or by a player reaching through the basket from below. Goaltending and basket interference committed by a defender result in awarding the basket to the offense, while basket interference committed by an offensive player results in cancelling the basket if one is scored. The defense gains possession in all cases of goaltending or basket interference. Fouls Main articles: Personal foul (basketball) and Technical foul An attempt to unfairly disadvantage an opponent through certain types of physical contact is illegal and is called a personal foul. These are most commonly committed by defensive players; however, they can be committed by offensive players as well. Players who are fouled either receive the ball to pass inbounds again, or receive one or more free throws if they are fouled in the act of shooting, depending on whether the shot was successful. One point is awarded for making a free throw, which is attempted from a line 15 feet (4.6 m) from the basket. The referee is responsible for judging whether contact is illegal, sometimes resulting in controversy. The calling of fouls can vary between games, leagues and referees. There is a second category of fouls called technical fouls , which may be charged for various rules violations including failure to properly record a player in the scorebook, or for unsportsmanlike conduct. These infractions result in one or two free throws, which may be taken by any of the five players on the court at the time. Repeated incidents can result in disqualification . A blatant foul involving physical contact that is either excessive or unnecessary is called an intentional foul (flagrant foul in the NBA). In FIBA and NCAA women's basketball, a foul resulting in ejection is called a disqualifying foul, while in leagues other than the NBA, such a foul is referred to as flagrant. If a team exceeds a certain limit of team fouls in a given period (quarter or half) – four for NBA, NCAA women's, and international games – the opposing team is awarded one or two free throws on all subsequent non-shooting fouls for that period, the number depending on the league. In the US college men's game and high school games for both sexes, if a team reaches 7 fouls in a half, the opposing team is awarded one free throw, along with a second shot if the first is made. This is called shooting "one-and-one". If a team exceeds 10 fouls in the half, the opposing team is awarded two free throws on all subsequent fouls for the half. When a team shoots foul shots, the opponents may not interfere with the shooter, nor may they try to regain possession until the last or potentially last free throw is in the air. After a team has committed a specified number of fouls, the other team is said to be "in the bonus". On scoreboards, this is usually signified with an indicator light reading "Bonus" or "Penalty" with an illuminated directional arrow or dot indicating that team is to receive free throws when fouled by the opposing team. (Some scoreboards also indicate the number of fouls committed.) If a team misses the first shot of a two-shot situation, the opposing team must wait for the completion of the second shot before attempting to reclaim possession of the ball and continuing play. If a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is unsuccessful, the player is awarded a number of free throws equal to the value of the attempted shot. A player fouled while attempting a regular two-point shot thus receives two shots, and a player fouled while attempting a three-point shot receives three shots. If a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is successful, typically the player will be awarded one additional free throw for one point. In combination with a regular shot, this is called a "three-point play" or "four-point play" (or more colloquially, an "and one") because of the basket made at the time of the foul (2 or 3 points) and the additional free throw (1 point). A foul committed during a shot attempt Common techniques and practices Main article: Basketball positions Basketball positions in the offensive zone Although the rules do not specify any positions whatsoever, they have evolved as part of basketball. During the early years of basketball's evolution, two guards, two forwards, and one center were used. In more recent times specific positions evolved, but the current trend, advocated by many top coaches including Mike Krzyzewski , is towards positionless basketball, where big players are free to shoot from outside and dribble if their skill allows it. [62] Popular descriptions of positions include: Point guard (often called the "1") : usually the fastest player on the team, organizes the team's offense by controlling the ball and making sure that it gets to the right player at the right time. Shooting guard (the "2") : creates a high volume of shots on offense, mainly long-ranged; and guards the opponent's best perimeter player on defense. Small forward (the "3") : often primarily responsible for scoring points via cuts to the basket and dribble penetration; on defense seeks rebounds and steals, but sometimes plays more actively. Power forward (the "4"): plays offensively often with their back to the basket; on defense, plays under the basket (in a zone defense) or against the opposing power forward (in man-to-man defense ). Center (the "5"): uses height and size to score (on offense), to protect the basket closely (on defense), or to rebound. The above descriptions are flexible. For most teams today, the shooting guard and small forward have very similar responsibilities and are often called the wings, as do the power forward and center, who are often called post players. While most teams describe two players as guards, two as forwards, and one as a center, on some occasions teams choose to call them by different designations. Strategy Main article: Basketball playbook There are two main defensive strategies: zone defense and man-to-man defense. In a zone defense , each player is assigned to guard a specific area of the court. Zone defenses often allow the defense to double team the ball, a manoeuver known as a trap. In a man-to-man defense , each defensive player guards a specific opponent. Offensive plays are more varied, normally involving planned passes and movement by players without the ball. A quick movement by an offensive player without the ball to gain an advantageous position is known as a cut. A legal attempt by an offensive player to stop an opponent from guarding a teammate, by standing in the defender's way such that the teammate cuts next to him, is a screen or pick. The two plays are combined in the pick and roll , in which a player sets a pick and then "rolls" away from the pick towards the basket. Screens and cuts are very important in offensive plays; these allow the quick passes and teamwork, which can lead to a successful basket. Teams almost always have several offensive plays planned to ensure their movement is not predictable. On court, the point guard is usually responsible for indicating which play will occur. Shooting Player releases a short jump shot, while her defender is either knocked down, or trying to "take a charge". Shooting is the act of attempting to score points by throwing the ball through the basket, methods varying with players and situations. Typically, a player faces the basket with both feet facing the basket. A player will rest the ball on the fingertips of the dominant hand (the shooting arm) slightly above the head, with the other hand supporting the side of the ball. The ball is usually shot by jumping (though not always) and extending the shooting arm. The shooting arm, fully extended with the wrist fully bent, is held stationary for a moment following the release of the ball, known as a follow-through. Players often try to put a steady backspin on the ball to absorb its impact with the rim. The ideal trajectory of the shot is somewhat controversial, but generally a proper arc is recommended. Players may shoot directly into the basket or may use the backboard to redirect the ball into the basket. Basketball falling through hoop The two most common shots that use the above described setup are the set shot and the jump shot . Both are preceded by a crouching action which preloads the muscles and increases the power of the shot. In a set shot, the shooter straightens up and throws from a standing position with neither foot leaving the floor; this is typically used for free throws. For a jump shot, the throw is taken in mid-air with the ball being released near the top of the jump. This provides much greater power and range, and it also allows the player to elevate over the defender. Failure to release the ball before the feet return to the floor is considered a traveling violation. Another common shot is called the layup . This shot requires the player to be in motion toward the basket, and to "lay" the ball "up" and into the basket, typically off the backboard (the backboard-free, underhand version is called a finger roll ). The most crowd-pleasing and typically highest-percentage accuracy shot is the slam dunk , in which the player jumps very high and throws the ball downward, through the basket while touching it. Slow-motion animation of a dunk Another shot that is less common than the layup, is the "circus shot". The circus shot is a low-percentage shot that is flipped, heaved, scooped, or flung toward the hoop while the shooter is off-balance, airborne, falling down or facing away from the basket. A back-shot is a shot taken when the player is facing away from the basket, and may be shot with the dominant hand, or both; but there is a very low chance that the shot will be successful. [63] A shot that misses both the rim and the backboard completely is referred to as an air ball . A particularly bad shot, or one that only hits the backboard, is jocularly called a brick . The hang time is the length of time a player stays in the air after jumping, either to make a slam dunk, layup or jump shot. Rebounding Main article: Rebound (basketball) A player making an offensive rebound The objective of rebounding is to successfully gain possession of the basketball after a missed field goal or free throw, as it rebounds from the hoop or backboard. This plays a major role in the game, as most possessions end when a team misses a shot. There are two categories of rebounds: offensive rebounds, in which the ball is recovered by the offensive side and does not change possession, and defensive rebounds, in which the defending team gains possession of the loose ball. The majority of rebounds are defensive, as the team on defense tends to be in better position to recover missed shots; for example, about 75% of rebounds in the NBA are defensive. [64] Passing See also: Assist (basketball) A pass is a method of moving the ball between players. Most passes are accompanied by a step forward to increase power and are followed through with the hands to ensure accuracy. A staple pass is the chest pass. The ball is passed directly from the passer's chest to the receiver's chest. A proper chest pass involves an outward snap of the thumbs to add velocity and leaves the defence little time to react. Another type of pass is the bounce pass. Here, the passer bounces the ball crisply about two-thirds of the way from his own chest to the receiver. The ball strikes the court and bounces up toward the receiver. The bounce pass takes longer to complete than the chest pass, but it is also harder for the opposing team to intercept (kicking the ball deliberately is a violation). Thus, players often use the bounce pass in crowded moments, or to pass around a defender. The overhead pass is used to pass the ball over a defender. The ball is released while over the passer's head. The outlet pass occurs after a team gets a defensive rebound. The next pass after the rebound is the outlet pass. The crucial aspect of any good pass is it being difficult to intercept. Good passers can pass the ball with great accuracy and they know exactly where each of their other teammates prefers to receive the ball. A special way of doing this is passing the ball without looking at the receiving teammate. This is called a no-look pass. Another advanced style of passing is the behind-the-back pass, which, as the description implies, involves throwing the ball behind the passer's back to a teammate. Although some players can perform such a pass effectively, many coaches discourage no-look or behind-the-back passes, believing them to be difficult to control and more likely to result in turnovers or violations. Dribbling A demonstration of the basic types of dribbling in basketball A U.S. Naval Academy ("Navy") player, left, posts up a U.S. Military Academy ("Army") defender. Main article: Dribble Dribbling is the act of bouncing the ball continuously with one hand and is a requirement for a player to take steps with the ball. To dribble, a player pushes the ball down towards the ground with the fingertips rather than patting it; this ensures greater control. When dribbling past an opponent, the dribbler should dribble with the hand farthest from the opponent, making it more difficult for the defensive player to get to the ball. It is therefore important for a player to be able to dribble competently with both hands. Good dribblers (or "ball handlers") tend to keep their dribbling hand low to the ground, reducing the distance of travel of the ball from the floor to the hand, making it more difficult for the defender to "steal" the ball. Good ball handlers frequently dribble behind their backs, between their legs, and switch directions suddenly, making a less predictable dribbling pattern that is more difficult to defend against. This is called a crossover , which is the most effective way to move past defenders while dribbling. A skilled player can dribble without watching the ball, using the dribbling motion or peripheral vision to keep track of the ball's location. By not having to focus on the ball, a player can look for teammates or scoring opportunities, as well as avoid the danger of having someone steal the ball away from him/her. Blocking Main article: Block (basketball) A block is performed when, after a shot is attempted, a defender succeeds in altering the shot by touching the ball. In almost all variants of play, it is illegal to touch the ball after it is in the downward path of its arc; this is known as goaltending . It is also illegal under NBA and Men's NCAA basketball to block a shot after it has touched the backboard, or when any part of the ball is directly above the rim. Under international rules it is illegal to block a shot that is in the downward path of its arc or one that has touched the backboard until the ball has hit the rim. After the ball hits the rim, it is again legal to touch it even though it is no longer considered as a block performed. To block a shot, a player has to be able to reach a point higher than where the shot is released. Thus, height can be an advantage in blocking. Players who are taller and playing the power forward or center positions generally record more blocks than players who are shorter and playing the guard positions. However, with good timing and a sufficiently high vertical leap, even shorter players can be effective shot blockers. Height Joonas Suotamo , a Finnish-American former professional center, is 6 feet 11 inches (2.11 m) tall. Many professional centers' heights exceed 7 feet (2.13 m). At the professional level, most male players are above 6 feet 3 inches (1.91 m) and most women above 5 feet 7 inches (1.70 m). Guards, for whom physical coordination and ball-handling skills are crucial, tend to be the smallest players. Almost all forwards in the top men's pro leagues are 6 feet 6 inches (1.98 m) or taller. Most centers are over 6 feet 10 inches (2.08 m) tall. According to a survey given to all NBA teams,[ when? ] the average height of all NBA players is just under 6 feet 7 inches (2.01 m), with the average weight being close to 222 pounds (101 kg). The tallest players ever in the NBA were Manute Bol and Gheorghe Mureșan , who were both 7 feet 7 inches (2.31 m) tall. At 7 feet 2 inches (2.18 m), Margo Dydek was the tallest player in the history of the WNBA. The shortest player ever to play in the NBA is Muggsy Bogues at 5 feet 3 inches (1.60 m). [65] Other average-height or relatively short players have thrived at the pro level, including Anthony "Spud" Webb , who was 5 feet 7 inches (1.70 m) tall, but had a 42-inch (1.1 m) vertical leap, giving him significant height when jumping, and Temeka Johnson , who won the WNBA Rookie of the Year Award and a championship with the Phoenix Mercury while standing only 5 feet 3 inches (1.60 m). While shorter players are often at a disadvantage in certain aspects of the game, their ability to navigate quickly through crowded areas of the court and steal the ball by reaching low are strengths. Players regularly inflate their height in high school or college. Many prospects exaggerate their height while in high school or college to make themselves more appealing to coaches and scouts, who prefer taller players. Charles Barkley stated; "I've been measured at 6–5, 6- 4+3⁄4. But I started in college at 6–6." Sam Smith, a former writer from the Chicago Tribune , said: "We sort of know the heights, because after camp, the sheet comes out. But you use that height, and the player gets mad. And then you hear from his agent. Or you file your story with the right height, and the copy desk changes it because they have the 'official' N.B.A. media guide, which is wrong. So you sort of go along with the joke." [66] Since the 2019-20 NBA season heights of NBA players are recorded definitively by measuring players with their shoes off. [67] Variations and similar games Main article: Variations of basketball Variations of basketball are activities based on the game of basketball, using common basketball skills and equipment (primarily the ball and basket). Some variations only have superficial rule changes, while others are distinct games with varying degrees of influence from basketball. Other variations include children's games, contests or activities meant to help players reinforce skills. An earlier version of basketball, played primarily by women and girls, was six-on-six basketball . Horseball is a game played on horseback where a ball is handled and points are scored by shooting it through a high net (approximately 1.5m×1.5m). The sport is like a combination of polo , rugby , and basketball. There is even a form played on donkeys known as Donkey basketball , which has attracted criticism from animal rights groups. Half-court Perhaps the single most common variation of basketball is the half-court game, played in informal settings without referees or strict rules. Only one basket is used, and the ball must be "taken back" or "cleared" – passed or dribbled outside the three-point line each time possession of the ball changes from one team to the other. Half-court games require less cardiovascular stamina, since players need not run back and forth a full court. Half-court raises the number of players that can use a court or, conversely, can be played if there is an insufficient number to form full 5-on-5 teams. Half-court basketball is usually played 1-on-1, 2-on-2 or 3-on-3. The last of these variations is gradually gaining official recognition as 3x3 , originally known as FIBA 33. It was first tested at the 2007 Asian Indoor Games in Macau and the first official tournaments were held at the 2009 Asian Youth Games and the 2010 Youth Olympics , both in Singapore. The first FIBA 3x3 Youth World Championships [68] were held in Rimini , Italy in 2011 , with the first FIBA 3x3 World Championships for senior teams following a year later in Athens . The sport is highly tipped to become an Olympic sport as early as 2016 . [69] In the summer of 2017, the BIG3 basketball league, a professional 3x3 half court basketball league that features former NBA players, began. The BIG3 features several rule variants including a four-point field goal . [70] Other variations Variations of basketball with their own page or subsection include: 21 (also known as American, cutthroat and roughhouse) [71]
See also: Pitch (baseball) The tactical decision that precedes almost every play in a baseball game involves pitch selection. [31] By gripping and then releasing the baseball in a certain manner, and by throwing it at a certain speed, pitchers can cause the baseball to break to either side, or downward, as it approaches the batter, thus creating differing pitches that can be selected. [32] Among the resulting wide variety of pitches that may be thrown, the four basic types are the fastball , the changeup (or off-speed pitch), and two breaking balls —the curveball and the slider . [33] Pitchers have different repertoires of pitches they are skillful at throwing. Conventionally, before each pitch, the catcher signals the pitcher what type of pitch to throw, as well as its general vertical or horizontal location. [34] If there is disagreement on the selection, the pitcher may shake off the sign and the catcher will call for a different pitch. With a runner on base and taking a lead , the pitcher may attempt a pickoff , a quick throw to a fielder covering the base to keep the runner's lead in check or, optimally, effect a tag out. [35] Pickoff attempts, however, are subject to rules that severely restrict the pitcher's movements before and during the pickoff attempt. Violation of any one of these rules could result in the umpire calling a balk against the pitcher, which permits any runners on base to advance one base with impunity. [36] If an attempted stolen base is anticipated, the catcher may call for a pitchout , a ball thrown deliberately off the plate, allowing the catcher to catch it while standing and throw quickly to a base. [37] Facing a batter with a strong tendency to hit to one side of the field, the fielding team may employ a shift , with most or all of the fielders moving to the left or right of their usual positions. With a runner on third base, the infielders may play in , moving closer to home plate to improve the odds of throwing out the runner on a ground ball , though a sharply hit grounder is more likely to carry through a drawn-in infield. [38] Batting and baserunning Boston Red Sox player Mookie Betts hits a pitch by swinging his bat . Several basic offensive tactics come into play with a runner on first base, including the fundamental choice of whether to attempt a steal of second base. The hit and run is sometimes employed, with a skillful contact hitter , the runner takes off with the pitch, drawing the shortstop or second baseman over to second base, creating a gap in the infield for the batter to poke the ball through. [39] The sacrifice bunt , calls for the batter to focus on making soft contact with the ball, so that it rolls a short distance into the infield, allowing the runner to advance into scoring position as the batter is thrown out at first. A batter, particularly one who is a fast runner, may also attempt to bunt for a hit. A sacrifice bunt employed with a runner on third base, aimed at bringing that runner home, is known as a squeeze play . [40] With a runner on third and fewer than two outs, a batter may instead concentrate on hitting a fly ball that, even if it is caught, will be deep enough to allow the runner to tag up and score—a successful batter, in this case, gets credit for a sacrifice fly . [38] In order to increase the chance of advancing a batter to first base via a walk, the manager will sometimes signal a batter who is ahead in the count (i.e., has more balls than strikes) to take , or not swing at, the next pitch. The batter's potential reward of reaching base (via a walk) exceeds the disadvantage if the next pitch is a strike. [41] History Further information: Origins of baseball The evolution of baseball from older bat-and-ball games is difficult to trace with precision. Consensus once held that today's baseball is a North American development from the older game rounders , popular among children in Great Britain and Ireland . [42] [43] [44] American baseball historian David Block suggests that the game originated in England; recently uncovered historical evidence supports this position. Block argues that rounders and early baseball were actually regional variants of each other, and that the game's most direct antecedents are the English games of stoolball and "tut-ball". [42] The earliest known reference to baseball is in a 1744 British publication, A Little Pretty Pocket-Book , by John Newbery . [45] Block discovered that the first recorded game of "Bass-Ball" took place in 1749 in Surrey , and featured the Prince of Wales as a player. [46] This early form of the game was apparently brought to Canada by English immigrants. [47] By the early 1830s, there were reports of a variety of uncodified bat-and-ball games recognizable as early forms of baseball being played around North America. [48] The first officially recorded baseball game in North America was played in Beachville, Ontario , Canada, on June 4, 1838. [49] In 1845, Alexander Cartwright , a member of New York City's Knickerbocker Club , led the codification of the so-called Knickerbocker Rules , [50] which in turn were based on rules developed in 1837 by William R. Wheaton of the Gotham Club. [51] While there are reports that the New York Knickerbockers played games in 1845, the contest long recognized as the first officially recorded baseball game in U.S. history took place on June 19, 1846, in Hoboken, New Jersey : the "New York Nine" defeated the Knickerbockers, 23–1, in four innings. [52] With the Knickerbocker code as the basis, the rules of modern baseball continued to evolve over the next half-century. [53] By the time of the Civil War , baseball had begun to overtake its fellow bat-and-ball sport cricket in popularity within the United States, due in part to baseball being of a much shorter duration than the form of cricket played at the time , as well as the fact that troops during the Civil War did not need a specialized playing surface to play baseball, as they would have required for cricket. [54] [55] In the United States Further information: Baseball in the United States and History of baseball in the United States Establishment of professional leagues In the mid-1850s, a baseball craze hit the New York metropolitan area , [56] and by 1856, local journals were referring to baseball as the "national pastime" or "national game". [57] A year later, the sport's first governing body, the National Association of Base Ball Players , was formed. In 1867, it barred participation by African Americans . [58] The more formally structured National League was founded in 1876. [59] Professional Negro leagues formed, but quickly folded. [60] In 1887, softball , under the name of indoor baseball or indoor-outdoor, was invented as a winter version of the parent game. [61] The National League's first successful counterpart, the American League , which evolved from the minor Western League , was established in 1893, and virtually all of the modern baseball rules were in place by then. [62] [63] The National Agreement of 1903 formalized relations both between the two major leagues and between them and the National Association of Professional Base Ball Leagues, representing most of the country's minor professional leagues . [64] The World Series , pitting the two major league champions against each other, was inaugurated that fall. [65] The Black Sox Scandal of the 1919 World Series led to the formation of the office of the Commissioner of Baseball . [66] The first commissioner, Kenesaw Mountain Landis , was elected in 1920. That year also saw the founding of the Negro National League ; the first significant Negro league, it would operate until 1931. For part of the 1920s, it was joined by the Eastern Colored League . [67] Rise of Ruth and racial integration Compared with the present, professional baseball in the early 20th century was lower-scoring, and pitchers were more dominant. [68] The so-called dead-ball era ended in the early 1920s with several changes in rule and circumstance that were advantageous to hitters. Strict new regulations governed the ball's size, shape and composition, along with a new rule officially banning the spitball and other pitches that depended on the ball being treated or roughed-up with foreign substances, resulted in a ball that traveled farther when hit. [69] The rise of the legendary player Babe Ruth , the first great power hitter of the new era, helped permanently alter the nature of the game. [70] In the late 1920s and early 1930s, St. Louis Cardinals general manager Branch Rickey invested in several minor league clubs and developed the first modern farm system . [71] A new Negro National League was organized in 1933; four years later, it was joined by the Negro American League . The first elections to the National Baseball Hall of Fame took place in 1936. In 1939, Little League Baseball was founded in Pennsylvania. [72] Jackie Robinson in 1945, with the era's Kansas City Royals , a barnstorming squad associated with the Negro American League 's Kansas City Monarchs A large number of minor league teams disbanded when World War II led to a player shortage. Chicago Cubs owner Philip K. Wrigley led the formation of the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League to help keep the game in the public eye. [73] The first crack in the unwritten agreement barring blacks from white-controlled professional ball occurred in 1945: Jackie Robinson was signed by the National League's Brooklyn Dodgers and began playing for their minor league team in Montreal . [74] In 1947, Robinson broke the major leagues' color barrier when he debuted with the Dodgers. [75] Latin-American players, largely overlooked before, also started entering the majors in greater numbers. In 1951, two Chicago White Sox, Venezuelan-born Chico Carrasquel and black Cuban-born Minnie Miñoso , became the first Hispanic All-Stars . [76] [77] Integration proceeded slowly: by 1953, only six of the 16 major league teams had a black player on the roster. [76] Attendance records and the age of steroids In 1975, the union's power—and players' salaries—began to increase greatly when the reserve clause was effectively struck down , leading to the free agency system . [78] Significant work stoppages occurred in 1981 and 1994 , the latter forcing the cancellation of the World Series for the first time in 90 years. [79] Attendance had been growing steadily since the mid-1970s and in 1994, before the stoppage, the majors were setting their all-time record for per-game attendance. [80] [81] After play resumed in 1995, non-division-winning wild card teams became a permanent fixture of the post-season. Regular-season interleague play was introduced in 1997 and the second-highest attendance mark for a full season was set. [82] In 2000, the National and American Leagues were dissolved as legal entities. While their identities were maintained for scheduling purposes (and the designated hitter distinction), the regulations and other functions—such as player discipline and umpire supervision—they had administered separately were consolidated under the rubric of MLB. [83] In 2001, Barry Bonds established the current record of 73 home runs in a single season. There had long been suspicions that the dramatic increase in power hitting was fueled in large part by the abuse of illegal steroids (as well as by the dilution of pitching talent due to expansion), but the issue only began attracting significant media attention in 2002 and there was no penalty for the use of performance-enhancing drugs before 2004. [84] In 2007, Bonds became MLB's all-time home run leader, surpassing Hank Aaron , as total major league and minor league attendance both reached all-time highs. [85] [86] Around the world With the historic popular moniker as "America's national pastime", baseball is well-established in several other countries as well. As early as 1877, a professional league, the International Association , featured teams from both Canada and the United States. [87] While baseball is widely played in Canada and many minor league teams have been based in the country, [88] [89] the American major leagues did not include a Canadian club until 1969, when the Montreal Expos joined the National League as an expansion team. In 1977, the expansion Toronto Blue Jays joined the American League. [90] Sadaharu Oh managing the Japan national team in the 2006 World Baseball Classic . Playing for the Central League 's Yomiuri Giants (1959–80), Oh set the professional world record for home runs. In 1847, American soldiers played what may have been the first baseball game in Mexico at Parque Los Berros in Xalapa , Veracruz . [91] The first formal baseball league outside of the United States and Canada was founded in 1878 in Cuba, which maintains a rich baseball tradition. The Dominican Republic held its first islandwide championship tournament in 1912. [92] Professional baseball tournaments and leagues began to form in other countries between the world wars, including the Netherlands (formed in 1922), Australia (1934), Japan (1936), Mexico (1937), and Puerto Rico (1938). [93] The Japanese major leagues have long been considered the highest quality professional circuits outside of the United States. [94] Pesäpallo , a Finnish variation of baseball, was invented by Lauri "Tahko" Pihkala in the 1920s, [95] and after that, it has changed with the times and grown in popularity. Picture of Pesäpallo match in 1958 in Jyväskylä , Finland. After World War II, professional leagues were founded in many Latin American countries, most prominently Venezuela (1946) and the Dominican Republic (1955). [96] Since the early 1970s, the annual Caribbean Series has matched the championship clubs from the four leading Latin American winter leagues: the Dominican Professional Baseball League , Mexican Pacific League , Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League , and Venezuelan Professional Baseball League . In Asia, South Korea (1982), Taiwan (1990) and China (2003) all have professional leagues. [97] The English football club, Aston Villa , were the first British baseball champions winning the 1890 National League of Baseball of Great Britain . [98] [99] The 2020 National Champions were the London Mets . Other European countries have seen professional leagues; the most successful, other than the Dutch league , is the Italian league , founded in 1948. [100] In 2004, Australia won a surprise silver medal at the Olympic Games . [101] The Confédération Européene de Baseball (European Baseball Confederation), founded in 1953, organizes a number of competitions between clubs from different countries. Other competitions between national teams, such as the Baseball World Cup and the Olympic baseball tournament , were administered by the International Baseball Federation (IBAF) from its formation in 1938 until its 2013 merger with the International Softball Federation to create the current joint governing body for both sports, the World Baseball Softball Confederation (WBSC). [102] Women's baseball is played on an organized amateur basis in numerous countries. [103] After being admitted to the Olympics as a medal sport beginning with the 1992 Games , baseball was dropped from the 2012 Summer Olympic Games at the 2005 International Olympic Committee meeting . It remained part of the 2008 Games . [104] While the sport's lack of a following in much of the world was a factor, [105] more important was MLB's reluctance to allow its players to participate during the major league season. [106] MLB initiated the World Baseball Classic , scheduled to precede its season, partly as a replacement, high-profile international tournament. The inaugural Classic , held in March 2006, was the first tournament involving national teams to feature a significant number of MLB participants. [107] [108] The Baseball World Cup was discontinued after its 2011 edition in favor of an expanded World Baseball Classic. [109] Distinctive elements Baseball has certain attributes that set it apart from the other popular team sports in the countries where it has a following. All of these sports use a clock, [110] play is less individual, [111] and the variation between playing fields is not as substantial or important. [112] The comparison between cricket and baseball demonstrates that many of baseball's distinctive elements are shared in various ways with its cousin sports. [113] No clock to kill A well-worn baseball In clock-limited sports, games often end with a team that holds the lead killing the clock rather than competing aggressively against the opposing team. In contrast, baseball has no clock, thus a team cannot win without getting the last batter out and rallies are not constrained by time. At almost any turn in any baseball game, the most advantageous strategy is some form of aggressive strategy. [114] Whereas, in the case of multi-day Test and first-class cricket , the possibility of a draw (which occurs because of the restrictions on time, which like in baseball, originally did not exist [115] ) often encourages a team that is batting last and well behind, to bat defensively and run out the clock, giving up any faint chance at a win, to avoid an overall loss. [116] While nine innings has been the standard since the beginning of professional baseball, the duration of the average major league game has increased steadily through the years. At the turn of the 20th century, games typically took an hour and a half to play. In the 1920s, they averaged just less than two hours, which eventually ballooned to 2:38 in 1960. [117] By 1997, the average American League game lasted 2:57 (National League games were about 10 minutes shorter—pitchers at the plate making for quicker outs than designated hitters). [118] In 2004, Major League Baseball declared that its goal was an average game of 2:45. [117] By 2014, though, the average MLB game took over three hours to complete. [119] The lengthening of games is attributed to longer breaks between half-innings for television commercials, increased offense, more pitching changes, and a slower pace of play, with pitchers taking more time between each delivery, and batters stepping out of the box more frequently. [117] [118] Other leagues have experienced similar issues. In 2008, Nippon Professional Baseball took steps aimed at shortening games by 12 minutes from the preceding decade's average of 3:18. [120] In 2016, the average nine-inning playoff game in Major League baseball was 3 hours and 35 minutes. This was up 10 minutes from 2015 and 21 minutes from 2014. [121] In response to the lengthening of the game, MLB decided from the 2023 season onward to institute a pitch clock rule to penalize batters and pitchers who take too much time between pitches; this had the effect of shortening 2023 regular season games by 24 minutes on average. [122] [123] Individual focus Babe Ruth in 1920, the year he joined the New York Yankees Although baseball is a team sport, individual players are often placed under scrutiny and pressure. While rewarding, it has sometimes been described as "ruthless" due to the pressure on the individual player. [124] In 1915, a baseball instructional manual pointed out that every single pitch, of which there are often more than two hundred in a game, involves an individual, one-on-one contest: "the pitcher and the batter in a battle of wits". [125] Pitcher, batter, and fielder all act essentially independent of each other. While coaching staffs can signal pitcher or batter to pursue certain tactics, the execution of the play itself is a series of solitary acts. If the batter hits a line drive, the outfielder is solely responsible for deciding to try to catch it or play it on the bounce and for succeeding or failing. The statistical precision of baseball is both facilitated by this isolation and reinforces it. Cricket is more similar to baseball than many other team sports in this regard: while the individual focus in cricket is mitigated by the importance of the batting partnership and the practicalities of tandem running, it is enhanced by the fact that a batsman may occupy the wicket for an hour or much more. [126] There is no statistical equivalent in cricket for the fielding error and thus less emphasis on personal responsibility in this area of play. [127] Uniqueness of parks Fenway Park , home of the Boston Red Sox . The Green Monster is visible beyond the playing field on the left. Unlike those of most sports, baseball playing fields can vary significantly in size and shape. While the dimensions of the infield are specifically regulated, the only constraint on outfield size and shape for professional teams, following the rules of MLB and Minor League Baseball , is that fields built or remodeled since June 1, 1958, must have a minimum distance of 325 feet (99 m) from home plate to the fences in left and right field and 400 feet (122 m) to center. [128] Major league teams often skirt even this rule. For example, at Minute Maid Park , which became the home of the Houston Astros in 2000, the Crawford Boxes in left field are only 315 feet (96 m) from home plate. [129] There are no rules at all that address the height of fences or other structures at the edge of the outfield. The most famously idiosyncratic outfield boundary is the left-field wall at Boston's Fenway Park , in use since 1912: the Green Monster is 310 feet (94 m) from home plate down the line and 37 feet (11 m) tall. [130] Similarly, there are no regulations at all concerning the dimensions of foul territory. Thus a foul fly ball may be entirely out of play in a park with little space between the foul lines and the stands, but a foulout in a park with more expansive foul ground. [131] A fence in foul territory that is close to the outfield line will tend to direct balls that strike it back toward the fielders, while one that is farther away may actually prompt more collisions, as outfielders run full speed to field balls deep in the corner. These variations can make the difference between a double and a triple or inside-the-park home run . [132] The surface of the field is also unregulated. While the adjacent image shows a traditional field surfacing arrangement (and the one used by virtually all MLB teams with naturally surfaced fields), teams are free to decide what areas will be grassed or bare. [133] Some fields—including several in MLB—use artificial turf . Surface variations can have a significant effect on how ground balls behave and are fielded as well as on baserunning. Similarly, the presence of a roof (seven major league teams play in stadiums with permanent or retractable roofs) can greatly affect how fly balls are played. [134] While football and soccer players deal with similar variations of field surface and stadium covering, the size and shape of their fields are much more standardized. The area out-of-bounds on a football or soccer field does not affect play the way foul territory in baseball does, so variations in that regard are largely insignificant. [135] A New York Yankees batter ( Andruw Jones ) and a Boston Red Sox catcher at Fenway Park These physical variations create a distinctive set of playing conditions at each ballpark. Other local factors, such as altitude and climate, can also significantly affect play. A given stadium may acquire a reputation as a pitcher's park or a hitter's park, if one or the other discipline notably benefits from its unique mix of elements. The most exceptional park in this regard is Coors Field , home of the Colorado Rockies . Its high altitude—5,282 feet (1,610 m) above sea level—is partly responsible for giving it the strongest hitter's park effect in the major leagues due to the low air pressure. [136] Wrigley Field , home of the Chicago Cubs, is known for its fickle disposition: a pitcher's park when the strong winds off Lake Michigan are blowing in, it becomes more of a hitter's park when they are blowing out. [137] The absence of a standardized field affects not only how particular games play out, but the nature of team rosters and players' statistical records. For example, hitting a fly ball 330 feet (100 m) into right field might result in an easy catch on the warning track at one park, and a home run at another. A team that plays in a park with a relatively short right field, such as the New York Yankees , will tend to stock its roster with left-handed pull hitters , who can best exploit it. On the individual level, a player who spends most of his career with a team that plays in a hitter's park will gain an advantage in batting statistics over time—even more so if his talents are especially suited to the park. [138] Statistics Further information: Baseball statistics Organized baseball lends itself to statistics to a greater degree than many other sports. Each play is discrete and has a relatively small number of possible outcomes. In the late 19th century, a former cricket player, English-born Henry Chadwick of Brooklyn , was responsible for the "development of the box score , tabular standings, the annual baseball guide, the batting average , and most of the common statistics and tables used to describe baseball." [139] The statistical record is so central to the game's "historical essence" that Chadwick came to be known as Father Baseball. [139] In the 1920s, American newspapers began devoting more and more attention to baseball statistics, initiating what journalist and historian Alan Schwarz describes as a "tectonic shift in sports, as intrigue that once focused mostly on teams began to go to individual players and their statistics lines." [140] The Official Baseball Rules administered by MLB require the official scorer to categorize each baseball play unambiguously. The rules provide detailed criteria to promote consistency. The score report is the official basis for both the box score of the game and the relevant statistical records. [141] General managers, managers, and baseball scouts use statistics to evaluate players and make strategic decisions. Rickey Henderson —the major leagues' all-time leader in runs and stolen bases—stealing third base in a 1988 game Certain traditional statistics are familiar to most baseball fans. The basic batting statistics include: [142] At bats : plate appearances, excluding walks and hit by pitches —where the batter's ability is not fully tested—and sacrifices and sacrifice flies—where the batter intentionally makes an out in order to advance one or more baserunners Hits: times a base is reached safely, because of a batted, fair ball without a fielding error or fielder's choice Runs: times circling the bases and reaching home safely Runs batted in (RBIs): number of runners who scored due to a batter's action (including the batter, in the case of a home run), except when batter grounded into double play or reached on an error Home runs: hits on which the batter successfully touched all four bases, without the contribution of a fielding error Batting average : hits divided by at bats—the traditional measure of batting ability The basic baserunning statistics include: [143] Stolen bases: times advancing to the next base entirely due to the runner's own efforts, generally while the pitcher is preparing to deliver or delivering the ball Caught stealing: times tagged out while attempting to steal a base Cy Young —the holder of many major league career marks, including wins and innings pitched, as well as losses—in 1908. MLB's annual awards for the best pitcher in each league are named for Young. The basic pitching statistics include: [144] Wins : credited to pitcher on winning team who last pitched before the team took a lead that it never relinquished (a starting pitcher must pitch at least five innings to qualify for a win) Losses : charged to pitcher on losing team who was pitching when the opposing team took a lead that it never relinquished Saves : games where the pitcher enters a game led by the pitcher's team, finishes the game without surrendering the lead, is not the winning pitcher, and either (a) the lead was three runs or less when the pitcher entered the game; (b) the potential tying run was on base, at bat, or on deck ; or (c) the pitcher pitched three or more innings Innings pitched : outs recorded while pitching divided by three (partial innings are conventionally recorded as, e.g., "5.2" or "7.1", the last digit actually representing thirds, not tenths, of an inning) Strikeouts: times pitching three strikes to a batter Winning percentage : wins divided by decisions (wins plus losses) Earned run average (ERA): runs allowed, excluding those resulting from fielding errors, per nine innings pitched The basic fielding statistics include: [145] Putouts : times the fielder catches a fly ball, tags or forces out a runner, or otherwise directly effects an out Assists : times a putout by another fielder was recorded following the fielder touching the ball Errors : times the fielder fails to make a play that should have been made with common effort, and the batting team benefits as a result Total chances : putouts plus assists plus errors Fielding average : successful chances (putouts plus assists) divided by total chances Among the many other statistics that are kept are those collectively known as situational statistics. For example, statistics can indicate which specific pitchers a certain batter performs best against. If a given situation statistically favors a certain batter, the manager of the fielding team may be more likely to change pitchers or have the pitcher intentionally walk the batter in order to face one who is less likely to succeed. [146] Sabermetrics Sabermetrics refers to the field of baseball statistical study and the development of new statistics and analytical tools. The term is also used to refer directly to new statistics themselves. The term was coined around 1980 by one of the field's leading proponents, Bill James , and derives from the Society for American Baseball Research (SABR). [147] The growing popularity of sabermetrics since the early 1980s has brought more attention to two batting statistics that sabermetricians argue are much better gauges of a batter's skill than batting average: [148] On-base percentage (OBP) measures a batter's ability to get on base. It is calculated by taking the sum of the batter's successes in getting on base (hits plus walks plus hit by pitches) and dividing that by the batter's total plate appearances (at bats plus walks plus hit by pitches plus sacrifice flies), except for sacrifice bunts. [149] Slugging percentage (SLG) measures a batter's ability to hit for power. It is calculated by taking the batter's total bases (one per each single, two per double, three per triple, and four per home run) and dividing that by the batter's at bats. [150] Some of the new statistics devised by sabermetricians have gained wide use: On-base plus slugging (OPS) measures a batter's overall ability. It is calculated by adding the batter's on-base percentage and slugging percentage. [151] Walks plus hits per inning pitched (WHIP) measures a pitcher's ability at preventing hitters from reaching base. It is calculated by adding the number of walks and hits a pitcher surrendered, then dividing by the number of innings pitched. [152] Wins Above Replacement (WAR) measures number of additional wins his team has achieved above the number of expected team wins if that player were substituted with a replacement-level player . [153] Popularity and cultural impact Two players on the baseball team of Tokyo, Japan's Waseda University in 1921 Writing in 1919, philosopher Morris Raphael Cohen described baseball as the national religion of the US. [154] In the words of sports columnist Jayson Stark , baseball has long been "a unique paragon of American culture"—a status he sees as devastated by the steroid abuse scandal. [155] Baseball has an important place in other national cultures as well: Scholar Peter Bjarkman describes "how deeply the sport is ingrained in the history and culture of a nation such as Cuba, [and] how thoroughly it was radically reshaped and nativized in Japan." [156] In the United States The major league game in the United States was originally targeted toward a middle-class, white-collar audience: relative to other spectator pastimes, the National League's set ticket price of 50 cents in 1876 was high, while the location of playing fields outside the inner city and the workweek daytime scheduling of games were also obstacles to a blue-collar audience. [157] A century later, the situation was very different. With the rise in popularity of other team sports with much higher average ticket prices—football, basketball, and hockey—professional baseball had become among the most popular blue-collar-oriented American spectator sports. [158] The Tampere Tigers celebrating the 2017 title in Turku , Finland Overall, baseball has a large following in the United States; a 2006 poll found that nearly half of Americans are fans. [159] This led to baseball being granted the title of "America's favorite pastime" by many American baseball fans. [160] In the late 1900s and early 2000s, baseball's position compared to football in the United States moved in contradictory directions. In 2008, MLB set a revenue record of $6.5 billion, matching the NFL's revenue for the first time in decades. [161] A new MLB revenue record of more than $10 billion was set in 2017. [162] On the other hand, the percentage of American sports fans polled who named baseball as their favorite sport was 9%, compared to pro football at 37%. [163] In 1985, the respective figures were pro football 24%, baseball 23%. [164] Because there are so many more major league games played, there is no comparison in overall attendance. [165] In 2008, total attendance at major league games was the second-highest in history: 78.6 million, 0.7% off the record set the previous year. [85] The following year, amid the U.S. recession, attendance fell by 6.6% to 73.4 million. [166] Eight years later, it dropped under 73 million. [167] Attendance at games held under the Minor League Baseball umbrella set a record in 2008, with 43.3 million. [168] While MLB games have not drawn the same national TV viewership as football games, MLB games are dominant in teams' local markets and regularly lead all programs in primetime in their markets during the summer. [169] Caribbean Since the early 1980s, the Dominican Republic, in particular the city of San Pedro de Macorís , has been the major leagues' primary source of foreign talent. [170] In 2017, 83 of the 868 players on MLB Opening Day rosters (and disabled lists) were from the country. Among other Caribbean countries and territories, a combined 97 MLB players were born in Venezuela, Cuba, and Puerto Rico. [171] Hall-of-Famer Roberto Clemente remains one of the greatest national heroes in Puerto Rico's history. [172] While baseball has long been the island's primary athletic pastime, its once well-attended professional winter league has declined in popularity since 1990, when young Puerto Rican players began to be included in the major leagues' annual first-year player draft. [173] In Cuba, where baseball is by every reckoning the national sport, [174] the national team overshadows the city and provincial teams that play in the top-level domestic leagues. [175] Asia An Afghan girl playing baseball in August 2002 In Asia, baseball is among the most popular sports in Japan and South Korea. [176] In Japan, where baseball is inarguably the leading spectator team sport, combined revenue for the twelve teams in Nippon Professional Baseball (NPB), the body that oversees both the Central and Pacific Leagues, was estimated at $1 billion in 2007. Total NPB attendance for the year was approximately 20 million. While in the preceding two decades, MLB attendance grew by 50 percent and revenue nearly tripled, the comparable NPB figures were stagnant. There are concerns that MLB's growing interest in acquiring star Japanese players will hurt the game in their home country. [177] Revenue figures are not released for the country's amateur system. Similarly, according to one official pronouncement, the sport's governing authority "has never taken into account attendance ... because its greatest interest has always been the development of athletes". [178] In Taiwan, baseball is one of the most widely spectated sports, with the origins dating back to Japanese rule. [179] Among children As of 2018 [update] , Little League Baseball oversees leagues with close to 2.4 million participants in over 80 countries. [180] The number of players has fallen since the 1990s, when 3 million children took part in Little League Baseball annually. [181] Babe Ruth League teams have over 1 million participants. [182] According to the president of the International Baseball Federation, between 300,000 and 500,000 women and girls play baseball around the world, including Little League and the introductory game of Tee Ball . [183] A varsity baseball team is an established part of physical education departments at most high schools and colleges in the United States. [184] In 2015, nearly half a million high schoolers and over 34,000 collegians played on their schools' baseball teams. [185] By early in the 20th century, intercollegiate baseball was Japan's leading sport. Today, high school baseball in particular is immensely popular there. [186] The final rounds of the two annual tournaments—the National High School Baseball Invitational Tournament in the spring, and the even more important National High School Baseball Championship in the summer—are broadcast around the country. The tournaments are known, respectively, as Spring Koshien and Summer Koshien after the 55,000-capacity stadium where they are played. [187] In Cuba, baseball is a mandatory part of the state system of physical education, which begins at age six. Talented children as young as seven are sent to special district schools for more intensive training—the first step on a ladder whose acme is the national baseball team. [175] In popular culture The American Tobacco Company 's line of baseball cards featured shortstop Honus Wagner of the Pittsburgh Pirates from 1909 to 1911. In 2007, the card shown here sold for $2.8 million. [188] Baseball has had a broad impact on popular culture, both in the United States and elsewhere. Dozens of English-language idioms have been derived from baseball ; in particular, the game is the source of a number of widely used sexual euphemisms . [189] The first networked radio broadcasts in North America were of the 1922 World Series : famed sportswriter Grantland Rice announced play-by-play from New York City's Polo Grounds on WJZ – Newark, New Jersey , which was connected by wire to WGY – Schenectady, New York , and WBZ – Springfield, Massachusetts . [190] The baseball cap has become a ubiquitous fashion item not only in the United States and Japan, but also in countries where the sport itself is not particularly popular, such as the United Kingdom. [191] Baseball has inspired many works of art and entertainment. One of the first major examples, Ernest Thayer 's poem " Casey at the Bat ", appeared in 1888. A wry description of the failure of a star player in what would now be called a "clutch situation", the poem became the source of vaudeville and other staged performances, audio recordings, film adaptations, and an opera, as well as a host of sequels and parodies in various media. There have been many baseball movies , including the Academy Award –winning The Pride of the Yankees (1942) and the Oscar nominees The Natural (1984) and Field of Dreams (1989). The American Film Institute 's selection of the ten best sports movies includes The Pride of the Yankees at number 3 and Bull Durham (1988) at number 5. [192] Baseball has provided thematic material for hits on both stage—the Adler – Ross musical Damn Yankees —and record— George J. Gaskin 's "Slide, Kelly, Slide", Simon and Garfunkel 's " Mrs. Robinson ", and John Fogerty 's " Centerfield ". [193] The baseball-inspired comedic sketch " Who's on First? ", popularized by Abbott and Costello in 1938, quickly became famous. Six decades later, Time named it the best comedy routine of the 20th century. [194] Literary works connected to the game include the short fiction of Ring Lardner and novels such as Bernard Malamud 's The Natural (the source for the movie), Robert Coover 's The Universal Baseball Association, Inc., J. Henry Waugh, Prop. , John Grisham 's Calico Joe and W. P. Kinsella 's Shoeless Joe (the source for Field of Dreams). Baseball's literary canon also includes the beat reportage of Damon Runyon ; the columns of Grantland Rice, Red Smith , Dick Young , and Peter Gammons ; and the essays of Roger Angell . Among the celebrated nonfiction books in the field are Lawrence S. Ritter 's The Glory of Their Times , Roger Kahn 's The Boys of Summer , and Michael Lewis 's Moneyball . The 1970 publication of major league pitcher Jim Bouton 's tell-all chronicle Ball Four is considered a turning point in the reporting of professional sports. [195] Baseball has also inspired the creation of new cultural forms. Baseball cards were introduced in the late 19th century as trade cards . A typical example featured an image of a baseball player on one side and advertising for a business on the other. In the early 1900s they were produced widely as promotional items by tobacco and confectionery companies. The 1930s saw the popularization of the modern style of baseball card, with a player photograph accompanied on the rear by statistics and biographical data. Baseball cards—many of which are now prized collectibles—are the source of the much broader trading card industry, involving similar products for different sports and non-sports-related fields. [196] Modern fantasy sports began in 1980 with the invention of Rotisserie League Baseball by New York writer Daniel Okrent and several friends. Participants in a Rotisserie league draft notional teams from the list of active MLB players and play out an entire imaginary season with game outcomes based on the players' latest real-world statistics. Rotisserie-style play quickly became a phenomenon. Now known more generically as fantasy baseball , it has inspired similar games based on an array of different sports. [197] The field boomed with increasing Internet access and new fantasy sports-related websites. By 2008, 29.9 million people in the United States and Canada were playing fantasy sports, spending $800 million on the hobby. [198] The burgeoning popularity of fantasy baseball is also credited with the increasing attention paid to sabermetrics—first among fans, only later among baseball professionals. [199] Derivative games Main article: Variations of baseball Informal variations of baseball have popped up over time, with games like corkball reflecting local traditions and allowing the game to be played in diverse environments. [200] Two variations of baseball, softball and Baseball5 , are internationally governed alongside baseball by the World Baseball Softball Confederation . [201] British baseball Main article: British baseball American professional baseball teams toured Britain in 1874 and 1889, and had a great effect on similar sports in Britain. In Wales and Merseyside, a strong community game had already developed with skills and plays more in keeping with the American game and the Welsh began to informally adopt the name "baseball" (Pêl Fas), to reflect the American style. By the 1890s, calls were made to follow the success of other working class sports (like Rugby in Wales and Soccer in Merseyside) and adopt a distinct set of rules and bureaucracy. [202] During the 1892 season rules for the game of "baseball" were agreed and the game was officially codified. [203] Finnish baseball Main article: Pesäpallo Finnish baseball, also known as pesäpallo, is a combination of traditional ball-batting team games and North American baseball, invented by Lauri "Tahko" Pihkala in the 1920s. [204] The basic idea of pesäpallo is similar to that of baseball: the offense tries to score by hitting the ball successfully and running through the bases, while the defense tries to put the batter and runners out. One of the most important differences between pesäpallo and baseball is that the ball is pitched vertically, which makes hitting the ball, as well as controlling the power and direction of the hit, much easier. This gives the offensive game more variety, speed, and tactical aspects compared to baseball. [204] See also
) Ice hockey 1875; 149 years ago (1875), Montreal , Quebec, Canada Characteristics Neck guard (depends on league) Mouthguard (depends on league) sometimes played on a frozen lake or pond for recreation Presence Yes Ice hockey (or simply hockey) is a team sport played on ice skates , usually on an ice skating rink with lines and markings specific to the sport. It belongs to a family of sports called hockey . In ice hockey, two opposing teams use ice hockey sticks to control, advance, and shoot a closed, vulcanized , rubber disc called a " puck " into the other team's goal. Each goal is worth one point. The team which scores the most goals is declared the winner. In a formal game, each team has six skaters on the ice at a time, barring any penalties, one of whom is the goaltender . Ice hockey is a full contact sport, and is considered to be one of the more physically demanding team sports. [1] [2] It is distinct from field hockey , in which players move a ball around a non-frozen pitch using field hockey sticks . The modern sport of ice hockey was developed in Canada, most notably in Montreal , where the first indoor game was played on March 3, 1875. Some characteristics of that game, such as the length of the ice rink and the use of a puck, have been retained to this day. Amateur ice hockey leagues began in the 1880s, and professional ice hockey originated around 1900. The Stanley Cup , emblematic of ice hockey club supremacy, was initially commissioned in 1892 as the "Dominion Hockey Challenge Cup" and was first awarded in 1893 to recognise the Canadian amateur champion and later became the championship trophy of the National Hockey League (NHL). In the early 1900s, the Canadian rules were adopted by the Ligue Internationale de Hockey sur Glace, in Paris , France, the precursor of the IIHF. The sport was played for the first time at the Olympics during the 1920 Summer Olympics —today it is a mainstay at the Winter Olympics . In 1994 ice hockey was officially recognized as Canada's national winter sport. [3] While women also played during the game's early formative years, it was not until organizers began to officially remove body checking from female ice hockey beginning in the mid-1980s that it began to gain greater popularity, which by then had spread to Europe and a variety of other countries. The first IIHF Women's World Championship was held in 1990, and women's play was introduced into the Olympics in 1998 . Main article: History of ice hockey Ice hockey is believed to have evolved from simple stick and ball games played in the 18th and 19th centuries in Britain, Ireland, and elsewhere, primarily bandy , hurling , and shinty . The North American sport of lacrosse was also influential. These games were brought to North America and several similar winter games using informal rules developed, such as shinny and ice polo, but later were absorbed into a new organized game with codified rules which today is ice hockey. Game[ edit ] Traditional layout of an ice hockey rink surface. Over the years, the NHL has made changes to its playing surface. Today, an NHL rink includes a trapezoid behind the goal line and a blue painted area in front of the goal. The blue lines are also closer together than they are on a traditional rink. While the general characteristics of the game remain constant, the exact rules depend on the particular code of play being used. The two most important codes are those of the IIHF and the NHL. [4] [5] Both of these codes, and others, originated from Canadian rules of ice hockey of the early 20th century. Ice hockey is played on a hockey rink . During normal play, there are six players on ice skates on the ice per side, one of them being the goaltender. The objective of the game is to score goals by shooting a hard vulcanized rubber disc, the puck , into the opponent's goal net at the opposite end of the rink. The players use their sticks to pass or shoot the puck. With certain restrictions, players may redirect the puck with any part of their body. Players may not hold the puck in their hand and are prohibited from using their hands to pass the puck to their teammates unless they are in the defensive zone. Players however can knock a puck out of the air with their hand to themself. Players are prohibited from kicking the puck into the opponent's goal, though unintentional redirections off the skate are permitted. Players may not intentionally bat the puck into the net with their hands. VTB Arena is an example of an indoor ice hockey arena. The arena is used by HC Dynamo Moscow . Hockey is an off-side game, meaning that forward passes are allowed, unlike in rugby. Before the 1930s, hockey was an on-side game, meaning that only backward passes were allowed. Those rules emphasized individual stick-handling to drive the puck forward. With the arrival of offside rules, the forward pass transformed hockey into a true team sport, where individual performance diminished in importance relative to team play, which could now be coordinated over the entire surface of the ice as opposed to merely rearward players. [6] The six players on each team are typically divided into three forwards, two defencemen, and one goaltender. The term skaters typically applies to all players except goaltenders. The forward positions consist of a centre and two wingers : a left wing and a right wing. Forwards often play together as units or lines, with the same three forwards always playing together. The defencemen usually stay together as a pair generally divided between left and right. Left and right side wingers or defencemen are generally positioned on the side on which they carry their stick. A substitution of an entire unit at once is called a line change. Teams typically employ alternate sets of forward lines and defensive pairings when short-handed or on a power play . The goaltender stands in a, usually blue, semi-circle called the crease in the defensive zone keeping pucks out of the goal. Substitutions are permitted at any time during the game, although during a stoppage of play the home team is permitted the final change. When players are substituted during play, it is called changing on the fly. An NHL rule added in the 2005–06 season prevents a team from changing their line after they ice the puck. Players from the South Carolina Stingrays perform a line change. A line change is a substitution of an entire line at once. The boards surrounding the ice help keep the puck in play and they can also be used as tools to play the puck. Players are permitted to bodycheck opponents into the boards to stop progress. The referees, linesmen and the outsides of the goal are "in play" and do not stop the game when the puck or players either bounce into or collide with them. Play can be stopped if the goal is knocked out of position. Play often proceeds for minutes without interruption. After a stoppage, play is restarted with a faceoff . Two players face each other and an official drops the puck to the ice, where the two players attempt to gain control of the puck. Markings (circles) on the ice indicate the locations for the faceoff and guide the positioning of players. Three major rules of play in ice hockey limit the movement of the puck: offside, icing, and the puck going out of play. A player is offside if he enters his opponent's zone before the puck itself. Under many situations, a player may not "ice the puck", which means shooting the puck all the way across both the centre line and the opponent's goal line. The puck goes out of play whenever it goes past the perimeter of the ice rink (onto the player benches, over the glass , or onto the protective netting above the glass) and a stoppage of play is called by the officials using whistles. It does not matter if the puck comes back onto the ice surface from outside of the rink, because the puck is considered dead once it leaves the perimeter of the rink. The referee may also blow the whistle for a stoppage in play if the puck is jammed along the boards when two or more players are battling for the puck for a long time, or if the puck is stuck on the back of any of the two nets for a period of time. Under IIHF rules, each team may carry a maximum of 20 players and two goaltenders on their roster. NHL rules restrict the total number of players per game to 18, plus two goaltenders. In the NHL, the players are usually divided into four lines of three forwards, and into three pairs of defencemen. On occasion, teams may elect to substitute an extra defenceman for a forward. The seventh defenceman may play as a substitute defenceman, spend the game on the bench, or if a team chooses to play four lines then this seventh defenceman may see ice-time on the fourth line as a forward. Periods and overtime[ edit ] A professional ice hockey game consists of three periods of twenty minutes, the clock running only when the puck is in play. The teams change ends after each period of play, including overtime. Recreational leagues and children's leagues often play shorter games, generally with three shorter periods of play. Scoreboard for a hockey game during the fourth period. If a game is tied at the end of the third period, several leagues and tournaments have teams play additional sudden death overtime periods. If a tie occurs in tournament play, as well as in the NHL playoffs, North Americans favour sudden death overtime , in which the teams continue to play twenty-minute periods until a goal is scored. Up until the 1999–2000 season, regular-season NHL games were settled with a single five-minute sudden death period with five players (plus a goalie) per side, with both teams awarded one point in the standings in the event of a tie. With a goal, the winning team would be awarded two points and the losing team none (just as if they had lost in regulation). The total elapsed time from when the puck first drops, is about 2 hours and 20 minutes for a 60-minute game. From the 1999–2000 until the 2003–04 seasons, the National Hockey League decided ties by playing a single five-minute sudden-death overtime period with each team having four skaters per side (plus the goalie). In the event of a tie, each team would still receive one point in the standings but in the event of a victory the winning team would be awarded two points in the standings and the losing team one point. The idea was to discourage teams from playing for a tie, since previously some teams might have preferred a tie and 1 point to risking a loss and zero points. The exception to this rule is if a team opts to pull their goalie in exchange for an extra skater during overtime and is subsequently scored upon (an empty net goal), in which case the losing team receives no points for the overtime loss. Since the 2015–16 season, the single five-minute sudden-death overtime session involves three skaters on each side. Since three skaters must always be on the ice in an NHL game, the consequences of penalties are slightly different from those during regulation play; any penalty during overtime that would result in a team losing a skater during regulation instead causes the other side to add a skater. Once the penalized team's penalty ends, the penalized skater exits the penalty box and the teams continue at 4-on-4 until the next stoppage of play, at which point the teams return to three skaters per side. [7] Several leagues and tournaments have implemented the shootout as a means to determine a winner, if the game remains tied after an extra overtime period. International play and several North American professional leagues, including the NHL (in the regular season), now use an overtime period identical to that from 1999–2000 to 2003–04 followed by a penalty shootout . If the score remains tied after an extra overtime period, the subsequent shootout consists of three players from each team taking penalty shots. After these six total shots, the team with the most goals is awarded the victory. If the score is still tied, the shootout then proceeds to sudden death . Regardless of the number of goals scored by either team during the shootout, the final score recorded will award the winning team one more goal than the score at the end of regulation time. In the NHL if a game is decided in overtime or by a shootout the winning team is awarded two points in the standings and the losing team is awarded one point. Ties no longer occur in the NHL. Overtime in the NHL playoffs differs from the regular season. In the playoffs there are no shootouts. If a game is tied after regulation, then a 20-minute period of 5-on-5 sudden-death overtime will be added. If the game is still tied after the overtime, another period is added until a team scores, which wins the match. Since 2019, the IIHF World Championships and the gold medal game in the Olympics use the same format, but in a 3-on-3 format. Main article: Penalty (ice hockey) An ice hockey player enters the penalty box. Players may be sent to the penalty box for rule infractions, forcing their team to play with one less player for a specified time. In ice hockey, infractions of the rules lead to a play stoppage whereby the play is restarted at a faceoff. Some infractions result in a penalty on a player or team. In the simplest case, the offending player is sent to the penalty box and their team must play with one less player on the ice for a designated time. Minor penalties last for two minutes, major penalties last for five minutes, and a double minor penalty is two consecutive penalties of two minutes duration. A single minor penalty may be extended by two minutes for causing visible injury to the victimized player. This is usually when blood is drawn during high sticking. Players may be also assessed personal extended penalties or game expulsions for misconduct in addition to the penalty or penalties their team must serve. The team that has been given a penalty is said to be playing short-handed while the opposing team is on a power play . A two-minute minor penalty is often charged for lesser infractions such as tripping , elbowing , roughing , high-sticking , delay of the game , too many players on the ice , boarding , illegal equipment, charging (leaping into an opponent or body-checking him after taking more than two strides), holding, holding the stick (grabbing an opponent's stick), interference, hooking , slashing , kneeing, unsportsmanlike conduct (arguing a penalty call with referee, extremely vulgar or inappropriate verbal comments), "butt-ending" (striking an opponent with the knob of the stick), "spearing" (jabbing an opponent with the blade of the stick), or cross-checking . As of the 2005–2006 season, a minor penalty is also assessed for diving , where a player embellishes or simulates an offence. More egregious fouls may be penalized by a four-minute double-minor penalty, particularly those that injure the victimized player. These penalties end either when the time runs out or when the other team scores during the power play. In the case of a goal scored during the first two minutes of a double-minor, the penalty clock is set down to two minutes upon a score, effectively expiring the first minor penalty. A skater cross-checking his opponent, checking him with the shaft of his stick with two hands. A skater hooking his opponent, using his stick to restrain him. These are examples of rule infractions in the sport; a penalty may be assessed against the players committing them. Five-minute major penalties are called for especially violent instances of most minor infractions that result in intentional injury to an opponent, or when a minor penalty results in visible injury (such as bleeding), as well as for fighting. Major penalties are always served in full; they do not terminate on a goal scored by the other team. Major penalties assessed for fighting are typically offsetting, meaning neither team is short-handed and the players exit the penalty box upon a stoppage of play following the expiration of their respective penalties. The foul of boarding (defined as "check[ing] an opponent in such a manner that causes the opponent to be thrown violently in the boards") [8] is penalized either by a minor or major penalty at the discretion of the referee, based on the violent state of the hit. A minor or major penalty for boarding is often assessed when a player checks an opponent from behind and into the boards. Some varieties of penalty do not require the offending team to play a man short. Concurrent five-minute major penalties in the NHL usually result from fighting. In the case of two players being assessed five-minute fighting majors, both the players serve five minutes without their team incurring a loss of player (both teams still have a full complement of players on the ice). This differs with two players from opposing sides getting minor penalties, at the same time or at any intersecting moment, resulting from more common infractions. In this case, both teams will have only four skating players (not counting the goaltender) until one or both penalties expire (if one penalty expires before the other, the opposing team gets a power play for the remainder of the time); this applies regardless of current pending penalties. However, in the NHL, a team always has at least three skaters on the ice. Thus, ten-minute misconduct penalties are served in full by the penalized player, but his team may immediately substitute another player on the ice unless a minor or major penalty is assessed in conjunction with the misconduct (a two-and-ten or five-and-ten). In this case, the team designates another player to serve the minor or major; both players go to the penalty box, but only the designee may not be replaced, and he is released upon the expiration of the two or five minutes, at which point the ten-minute misconduct begins. In addition, game misconducts are assessed for deliberate intent to inflict severe injury on an opponent (at the officials' discretion), or for a major penalty for a stick infraction or repeated major penalties. The offending player is ejected from the game and must immediately leave the playing surface (he does not sit in the penalty box); meanwhile, if an additional minor or major penalty is assessed, a designated player must serve out of that segment of the penalty in the box (similar to the above-mentioned "two-and-ten"). In some rare cases, a player may receive up to nineteen minutes in penalties for one string of plays. This could involve receiving a four-minute double-minor penalty, getting in a fight with an opposing player who retaliates, and then receiving a game misconduct after the fight. In this case, the player is ejected and two teammates must serve the double-minor and major penalties. A skater taking a penalty shot , with a referee in the background. A referee may award a player with a penalty shot if they assess an infraction stopped the player from a clear scoring opportunity. A penalty shot is awarded to a player when the illegal actions of another player stop a clear scoring opportunity, most commonly when the player is on a breakaway . A penalty shot allows the obstructed player to pick up the puck on the centre red-line and attempt to score on the goalie with no other players on the ice, to compensate for the earlier missed scoring opportunity. A penalty shot is also awarded for a defender other than the goaltender covering the puck in the goal crease, a goaltender intentionally displacing his own goal posts during a breakaway to avoid a goal, a defender intentionally displacing his own goal posts when there is less than two minutes to play in regulation time or at any point during overtime, or a player or coach intentionally throwing a stick or other object at the puck or the puck carrier and the throwing action disrupts a shot or pass play. Officials also stop play for puck movement violations, such as using one's hands to pass the puck in the offensive end, but no players are penalized for these offences. The sole exceptions are deliberately falling on or gathering the puck to the body, carrying the puck in the hand, and shooting the puck out of play in one's defensive zone (all penalized two minutes for delay of game). In the NHL, a unique penalty applies to the goalies. The goalies now are forbidden to play the puck in the "corners" of the rink near their own net. This will result in a two-minute penalty against the goalie's team. Only in the area in front of the goal line and immediately behind the net (marked by two red lines on either side of the net) can the goalie play the puck. An additional rule that has never been a penalty, but was an infraction in the NHL before recent rules changes, is the two-line offside pass . Prior to the 2005–06 NHL season, play was stopped when a pass from inside a team's defending zone crossed the centre line, with a face-off held in the defending zone of the offending team. Now, the centre line is no longer used in the NHL to determine a two-line pass infraction, a change that the IIHF had adopted in 1998. Players are now able to pass to teammates who are more than the blue and centre ice red line away. The NHL has taken steps to speed up the game of hockey and create a game of finesse, by reducing the number of illegal hits, fights, and "clutching and grabbing" that occurred in the past. Rules are now more strictly enforced, resulting in more penalties, which provides more protection to the players and facilitates more goals being scored. The governing body for United States' amateur hockey has implemented many new rules to reduce the number of stick-on-body occurrences, as well as other detrimental and illegal facets of the game ("zero tolerance"). In men's hockey, but not in women's, a player may use his hip or shoulder to hit another player if the player has the puck or is the last to have touched it. This use of the hip and shoulder is called body checking . Not all physical contact is legal—in particular, hits from behind, hits to the head and most types of forceful stick-on-body contact are illegal. A referee calls a delayed penalty, which sees play continue until a goal is scored, or the opposing team regains control of the puck. A delayed penalty call occurs when an offence is committed by the team that does not have possession of the puck. In this circumstance the team with possession of the puck is allowed to complete the play; that is, play continues until a goal is scored, a player on the opposing team gains control of the puck, or the team in possession commits an infraction or penalty of their own. Because the team on which the penalty was called cannot control the puck without stopping play, it is impossible for them to score a goal. In these cases, the team in possession of the puck can pull the goalie for an extra attacker without fear of being scored on. However, it is possible for the controlling team to mishandle the puck into their own net. If a delayed penalty is signalled and the team in possession scores, the penalty is still assessed to the offending player, but not served. In 2012, this rule was changed by the United States' National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) for college level hockey . In college games, the penalty is still enforced even if the team in possession scores. [9] Main article: Official (ice hockey) A typical game of hockey is governed by two to four officials on the ice, charged with enforcing the rules of the game. There are typically two linesmen who are mainly responsible for calling "offside" and " icing " violations, breaking up fights, and conducting faceoffs, [10] and one or two referees, [11] who call goals and all other penalties. Linesmen can, however, report to the referee(s) that a penalty should be assessed against an offending player in some situations. [12] The restrictions on this practice vary depending on the governing rules. On-ice officials are assisted by off-ice officials who act as goal judges, time keepers, and official scorers. Officials working under a four-official system. Orange armbands are worn by the referees to distinguish them from the lineswomen. The most widespread system is the "three-man system", which uses one referee and two linesmen. A less commonly used system is the two referee and one linesman system. This system is close to the regular three-man system except for a few procedure changes. Beginning with the National Hockey League, a number of leagues have implemented the "four-official system", where an additional referee is added to aid in the calling of penalties normally difficult to assess by one referee. The system is used in every NHL game since 2001, at IIHF World Championships , the Olympics and in many professional and high-level amateur leagues in North America and Europe. Officials are selected by the league they work for. Amateur hockey leagues use guidelines established by national organizing bodies as a basis for choosing their officiating staffs. In North America, the national organizing bodies Hockey Canada and USA Hockey approve officials according to their experience level as well as their ability to pass rules knowledge and skating ability tests. Hockey Canada has officiating levels I through VI. [13] USA Hockey has officiating levels 1 through 4. [14]
Pull buoy Often used at the same time as hand paddles, pull buoys support swimmers' legs (and prevent them from kicking) while they focus on pulling. Pull buoys are made of foam so they float in the water. Swimmers hold them in between the thighs. They can also be used as a kickboard to make kicking a little harder. Ankle bands Improving balance will minimize the need for this kick to provide an upward, instead of a forward vector, and in some cases completely corrects the kick. Using an ankle band will have the immediate effect of turning off your kick, which then forces you to make efforts to correct your balance. If you are successful in discovering these, then the ankle band has done part of its job. [21] Snorkel A snorkel is a plastic device that helps swimmers breathe while swimming. This piece of equipment helps the swimmer practice keeping their head in one position, along with training them for the proper breathing technique of breathing in through the mouth and out the nose. This technique is the opposite of a common runner's breathing pattern, which is in the nose and out the mouth. [22] [23] Common swimwear Brands such as Arena , Speedo , TYR , and Adidas are popular regular swimwear brands. The most durable material for regular swimming is Polyester. The main difference between competition and regular swimwear is that competition swimwear is tighter and compresses the muscles of the swimmers. Regular swimwear is easier to put on and more comfortable for leisure activities. Men Olympic gold medalist Tyler Clary of U.S. walks wearing men's swim briefs , while Hayley Palmer sports a racerback one-piece swimsuit , 2012 The most used practice swimwear for men includes briefs and jammers . Males generally swim barechested . There was controversy after the Beijing Olympic Games in 2008 when many Olympic swimmers broke records an unprecedented number of times using revolutionary swimsuits that covered their entire legs. To highlight the issue, in 2008, 70 world records were broken in one year, and 66 Olympic records were broken in one Olympic Games (there were races in Beijing where the first five finishers were swimming faster than the old world record). As of 1 January 2010, men are only allowed to wear suits from the waist to the knees. [24] They are also only permitted to wear one piece of swimwear; they cannot wear briefs underneath jammers. This rule was enacted after the controversy in the Beijing Olympics and Rome World Championships. Women Women wear one-piece suits with thicker and higher backs for competition, though two-piece suits can also be worn during practice. Backs vary mainly in strap thickness and geometric design. Most common styles include: racerback, axel back, corset, diamondback, and butterfly-back/Fly-Back. There are also different style lengths: three-quarter length (reaches the knees), regular length (shoulders to hips), and bikini style (two-piece). As of 1 January 2010, in competition, women must wear suits that do not go past the shoulders or knees. Use of drag wear Drag suits are used to increase water resistance against the swimmer to help them train for competitions. Other forms of drag wear include nylons, old suits, and T-shirts: articles that increase friction in the water to build strength during training, and thus increase speed once drag items are removed for competition. Some swimmers practice in basketball shorts over their bathing suit, wearing two bathing suits, or wearing an extra bathing suit with holes cut in the material. Many swimmers also shave areas of exposed skin before end-of-season competitions to reduce friction in the water. The practice gained popularity after the 1956 Olympics, when Murray Rose and Jon Henricks came shaved and won gold medals for Australia. [25] Freshly shaven skin is less resistant when in the water. In addition, a 1989 study demonstrated that shaving improves a swimmer's overall performance by reducing drag. [26] The disadvantages of using a drag suit include the depletion of proper stroke. This is caused by the swimmer's own fatigue. When the swimmer becomes more fatigued, different muscle groups become more tired. Consequently, the swimmer will try to engage another group of muscle to do the same thing, which can cause the stroke efficiency to drop.[ citation needed ] Elite and international swimming Elite and international swimming comprises the highest level of competition available to swimmers, including competitions such as the Olympic Games and the World Aquatics Championships . Professionalism Swimming creates a mix of levels, including: fully professional, semi-professional, and amateur. Fully professional swimmers will typically get a salary both from their national governing body and from outside sponsors, semi-professionals a small stipend from their national governing body, and amateurs receive no funding. Outside of these major championships prize money is low – the 2015 FINA World Cup series has a total prize fund of $3,000 per race shared between the top three [27] and the 2014–15 USA Grand Prix Series $1,800 [28] compared to the 2015 World Aquatics Championships fund of $60,000 per race shared between the top eight. [29] Open-water swimming Swimmers must go around the yellow marked to count as a "lap" Open water swimming is swimming outside a regular pool, usually in a lake, or sometimes ocean. Popularity of the sport has grown in recent years, particularly since the 10 km open water event was added as an Olympic event in 2005, contested for the first time in the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing. [30] New recent technology has developed much faster swimsuits. Full body suits have been banned, but swimmers at the very top levels still wear suits that have been lasered together because stitching creates drag. The disadvantage of these suits is that they are often uncomfortable and tight, and can tear easily if not handled carefully. The largest Ocean Swim's in terms of numbers of participants are in Australia, with the Pier to Pub , Cole Classic and Melbourne Swim Classic all with roughly 5000 swimming participants. Changes to the sport Swimming times have dropped over the years due to superior training techniques and new technical developments. The first four Olympics were not held in pools, but in open water (1896 – the Mediterranean, 1900 – the Seine river, 1904 – an artificial lake, 1906 – the Mediterranean). The 1904 Olympics ' freestyle race was the only one ever measured at 100 yards, instead of the usual 100 meters. A 100-meter pool was built for the 1908 Olympics and sat in the center of the main stadium's track and field oval. The 1912 Olympics , held in the Stockholm harbor, marked the beginning of electronic timing .[ clarification needed ] Olympian Ryan Lochte (near) standing on top of the wedged starting blocks. Each swimmer performs a preparatory isometric press by applying downward pressure onto their bent legs. This serves to preload the muscles and helps to make the subsequent dive more powerful. Male swimmers wore full-body suits until the 1940s, which caused more drag in the water than their modern swimwear counterparts experience. Competition suits now include engineered fabric and designs to reduce swimmers' drag in the water and prevent athlete fatigue. In addition, over the years, pool designs have lessened the drag. Some design considerations allow for the reduction of swimming resistance , making the pool faster. These include proper pool depth, elimination of currents, increased lane width, energy absorbing racing lane lines and gutters, and the use of other innovative hydraulic, acoustic, and illumination designs. There have been major changes in starting blocks over the past years. Starting blocks used to be small, narrow and straight [31] but through time they have become bigger and wider and nowadays the surface of the block is angled towards the swimming pool. [32] In addition, starting blocks now have a "wedge" which is a raised, slanting platform situated at the rear of the main block. This enables the swimmer to adopt a crouched position at a 90 degrees angle and push off quicker with the rear leg to increase their launch power. [33] The 1924 Summer Olympics were the first to use the standard 50-meter pool with marked lanes. In the freestyle, swimmers originally dove from the pool walls, but diving blocks were incorporated at the 1936 Summer Olympics . The tumble turn was developed by the 1950s and goggles were first used in the 1976 Olympics . There were also changes in the late 20th century in terms of technique. Breaststrokers are now allowed to dip their heads completely under water to glide, which allows for a longer stroke and faster time. However, the breaststrokers must bring their heads up at the completion of each cycle. In addition, a key hole pull in the breaststroke start and turns has been added to help speed up the stroke. Now off the start and turns, breaststrokers are allowed one butterfly kick to help increase their speed. This change was made official in December 2014. [34] Backstrokers are now allowed to turn on their stomachs before the wall in order to perform a "flip-turn". Previously, they had to reach and flip backwards and a variation of it, known as a "bucket turn" or a "suicide turn", is sometimes used in individual medley events to transition from backstroke to breaststroke. Records The foundation of FINA in 1908 signaled the commencement of recording the first official world records in swimming . [35] At that time records could be established in any swimming pool of length not less than 25 yards, and records were also accepted for intermediate distance split times from long-distance events. Today World Records will only be accepted when times are reported by Automatic Officiating Equipment, or Semi-Automatic Officiating Equipment in the case of Automatic Officiating Equipment system malfunction. [36] Records in events such as 300 yd, 300 m, 1000 yd, and 1000 m freestyle, 400 m backstroke, and 400 m and 500 m breaststroke were no longer ratified from 1948. A further removal of the 500 yd and 500 m freestyle, 150 m backstroke, and 3×100 m medley relay from the record listings occurred in 1952. In 1952, the national federations of the United States and Japan proposed at the FINA Congress the separation of records achieved in long-course and short-course pools; however, it was four more years before action came into effect with the Congress deciding to retain only records held in 50 m pools as the official world record listings. By 1969 there were thirty-one events in which FINA recognised official world records – 16 for men, 15 for women – closely resembling the event schedule that was in use at the Olympic Games . The increase in accuracy and reliability of electronic timing equipment led to the introduction of hundredths of a second to the time records from 21 August 1972. Records in short course (25 m) pools began to be officially approved as "short course world records" from 3 March 1991. Prior to this date, times in short course (25 m) pools were not officially recognised, but were regarded a "world best time" (WBT). From 31 October 1994 times in 50 m backstroke, breaststroke, and butterfly were added to the official record listings. FINA currently recognises world records in the following events for both men and women. [37]
Main article: Bow and arrow A Pacific yew selfbow drawn by the split finger method. Selfbows are made from a single piece of wood. While there is great variety in the construction details of bows (both historical and modern), all bows consist of a string attached to elastic limbs that store mechanical energy imparted by the user drawing the string. Bows may be broadly split into two categories: those drawn by pulling the string directly and those that use a mechanism to pull the string. Directly drawn bows may be further divided based upon differences in the method of limb construction, notable examples being self bows , laminated bows and composite bows . Bows can also be classified by the bow shape of the limbs when unstrung; in contrast to traditional European straight bows, a recurve bow and some types of longbow have tips that curve away from the archer when the bow is unstrung. The cross-section of the limb also varies; the classic longbow is a tall bow with narrow limbs that are D-shaped in cross section, and the flatbow has flat wide limbs that are approximately rectangular in cross-section. Cable-backed bows use cords as the back of the bow; the draw weight of the bow can be adjusted by changing the tension of the cable. They were widespread among Inuit who lacked easy access to good bow wood. One variety of cable-backed bow is the Penobscot bow or Wabenaki bow, invented by Frank Loring (Chief Big Thunder) about 1900. [53] It consists of a small bow attached by cables on the back of a larger main bow. In different cultures, the arrows are released from either the left or right side of the bow, and this affects the hand grip and position of the bow. In Arab archery , Turkish archery , and Japanese archery . The arrows are released from the right hand side of the bow, and this affects construction of the bow. In western archery, the arrow is usually released from the left hand side of the bow for a right-handed archer. Modern (takedown) recurve bow Compound bows are designed to reduce the force required to hold the string at full draw, hence allowing the archer more time to aim with less muscular stress. Most compound designs use cams or elliptical wheels on the ends of the limbs to achieve this. A typical let-off is anywhere from 65% to 80%. For example, a 27 kg (60 lb) bow with 80% let-off only requires 53 N (12 lbf) to hold at full draw. Up to 99% let-off is possible. [54] The compound bow was invented by Holless Wilbur Allen in the 1960s (a US patent was filed in 1966 and granted in 1969) and it has become the most widely used type of bow for all forms of archery in North America. Mechanically drawn bows typically have a stock or other mounting, such as the crossbow . Crossbows typically have shorter draw lengths compared to compound bows. Because of this, heavier draw weights are required to achieve the same energy transfer to the arrow. These mechanically drawn bows also have devices to hold the tension when the bow is fully drawn. They are not limited by the strength of a single archer and larger varieties have been used as siege engines . Types of arrows and fletchings[ edit ] Main article: Arrow The most common form of arrow consists of a shaft , with an arrowhead at the front end, and fletchings and a nock at the other end. Arrows across time and history have normally been carried in a container known as a quiver , which can take many different forms. Shafts of arrows are typically composed of solid wood , bamboo , fiberglass , aluminium alloy , carbon fiber , or composite materials . Wooden arrows are prone to warping. Fiberglass arrows are brittle, but can be produced to uniform specifications easily. Aluminium shafts were a very popular high-performance choice in the latter half of the 20th century, due to their straightness, lighter weight, and subsequently higher speed and flatter trajectories. Carbon fiber arrows became popular in the 1990s because they are very light, flying even faster and flatter than aluminium arrows. Today, the most popular arrows at tournaments and Olympic events are made of composite materials. The arrowhead is the primary functional component of the arrow. Some arrows may simply use a sharpened tip of the solid shaft, but separate arrowheads are far more common, usually made from metal, stone, or other hard materials. The most commonly used forms are target points, field points, and broadheads, although there are also other types, such as bodkin, judo, and blunt heads. Shield cut straight fletching – here the hen feathers are barred red Fletching is traditionally made from bird feathers, but solid plastic vanes and thin sheet-like spin vanes are used. They are attached near the nock (rear) end of the arrow with thin double sided tape, glue, or, traditionally, sinew. The most common configuration in all cultures is three fletches, though as many as six have been used. Two makes the arrow unstable in flight. When the arrow is three-fletched, the fletches are equally spaced around the shaft, with one placed such that it is perpendicular to the bow when nocked on the string, though variations are seen with modern equipment, especially when using the modern spin vanes. This fletch is called the "index fletch" or "cock feather" (also known as "the odd vane out" or "the nocking vane"), and the others are sometimes called the "hen feathers". Commonly, the cock feather is of a different color. However, if archers are using fletching made of feather or similar material, they may use same color vanes, as different dyes can give varying stiffness to vanes, resulting in less precision. When an arrow is four-fletched, two opposing fletches are often cock feathers, and occasionally the fletches are not evenly spaced. The fletching may be either parabolic cut (short feathers in a smooth parabolic curve) or shield cut (generally shaped like half of a narrow shield), and is often attached at an angle, known as helical fletching, to introduce a stabilizing spin to the arrow while in flight. Whether helical or straight fletched, when natural fletching (bird feathers) is used it is critical that all feathers come from the same side of the bird. Oversized fletchings can be used to accentuate drag and thus limit the range of the arrow significantly; these arrows are called flu-flus . Misplacement of fletchings can change the arrow's flight path dramatically. Main article: Bowstring Dacron and other modern materials offer high strength for their weight and are used on most modern bows. Linen and other traditional materials are still used on traditional bows. Several modern methods of making a bowstring exist, such as the 'endless loop' and 'Flemish twist'. Almost any fiber can be made into a bowstring. The author of Arab Archery suggests the hide of a young, emaciated camel. [55] Njál's saga describes the refusal of a wife, Hallgerður, to cut her hair to make an emergency bowstring for her husband, Gunnar Hámundarson , who is then killed. Main articles: Bracer , Finger tab , and Thumb ring A right-hand finger tab to protect the hand while the string is drawn Most modern archers wear a bracer (also known as an arm-guard) to protect the inside of the bow arm from being hit by the string and prevent clothing from catching the bowstring. The bracer does not brace the arm; the word comes from the armoury term " brassard ", meaning an armoured sleeve or badge. The Navajo people have developed highly ornamented bracers as non-functional items of adornment. [56] Some archers (nearly all female archers) wear protection on their chests, called chestguards or plastrons. The myth of the Amazons was that they had one breast removed to solve this problem. [57] Roger Ascham mentions one archer, presumably with an unusual shooting style, who wore a leather guard for his face. [58] The drawing digits are normally protected by a leather tab , glove, or thumb ring . A simple tab of leather is commonly used, as is a skeleton glove. Medieval Europeans probably used a complete leather glove. [59] Eurasiatic archers who used the thumb or Mongolian draw protected their thumbs, usually with leather according to the author of Arab Archery, [60] but also with special rings of various hard materials. Many surviving Turkish and Chinese examples are works of considerable art. Some are so highly ornamented that the users could not have used them to loose an arrow. Possibly these were items of personal adornment, and hence value, remaining extant whilst leather had virtually no intrinsic value and would also deteriorate with time. In traditional Japanese archery a special glove is used that has a ridge to assist in drawing the string. [61] Main article: Release aid Release aid A release aid is a mechanical device designed to give a crisp and precise loose of arrows from a compound bow. In the most commonly used, the string is released by a finger-operated trigger mechanism, held in the archer's hand or attached to their wrist. In another type, known as a back-tension release, the string is automatically released when drawn to a pre-determined tension. Main article: Stabiliser (archery) Stabilizers are mounted at various points on the bow. Common with competitive archery equipment are special brackets that allow multiple stabilizers to be mounted at various angles to fine tune the bow's balance. Stabilizers aid in aiming by improving the balance of the bow. Sights, quivers, rests, and design of the riser (the central, non-bending part of the bow) make one side of the bow heavier. One purpose of stabilizers are to offset these forces. A reflex riser design will cause the top limb to lean towards the shooter. In this case a heavier front stabilizer is desired to offset this action. A deflex riser design has the opposite effect and a lighter front stabilizer may be used. Stabilizers can reduce noise and vibration. These energies are absorbed by viscoelastic polymers, gels, powders, and other materials used to build stabilizers. Stabilizers improve the forgiveness and accuracy by increasing the moment of inertia of the bow to resist movement during the shooting process. Lightweight carbon stabilizers with weighted ends are desirable because they improve the moment of inertia while minimizing the weight added. Shooting technique and form[ edit ] Historical reenactment of medieval archery Chief Master Sgt. Kevin Peterson demonstrates safe archery techniques while aiming an arrow at a target on the 28th Force Support Squadron trap and skeet range at Ellsworth Air Force Base , S.D., 11 October 2012. The standard convention on teaching archery is to hold the bow depending upon eye dominance. [62] (One exception is in modern kyūdō where all archers are trained to hold the bow in the left hand.) [63] Therefore, if one is right-eye dominant, they would hold the bow in the left hand and draw the string with the right hand. However, not everyone agrees with this line of thought. A smoother, and more fluid release of the string will produce the most consistently repeatable shots, and therefore may provide greater accuracy of the arrow flight. Some believe that the hand with the greatest dexterity should therefore be the hand that draws and releases the string. Either eye can be used for aiming, and the less dominant eye can be trained over time to become more effective for use. To assist with this, an eye patch can be temporarily worn over the dominant eye. The hand that holds the bow is referred to as the bow hand and its arm the bow arm. The opposite hand is called the drawing hand or string hand. Terms such as bow shoulder or string elbow follow the same convention. If shooting according to eye dominance, right-eye-dominant archers shooting conventionally hold the bow with their left hand. If shooting according to hand dexterity, the archer draws the string with the hand that possesses the greatest dexterity, regardless of eye dominance. Modern form[ edit ] To shoot an arrow, an archer first assumes the correct stance. The body should be at or nearly perpendicular to the target and the shooting line, with the feet placed shoulder-width apart. As an archer progresses from beginner to a more advanced level other stances such as the "open stance" or the "closed stance" may be used, although many choose to stick with a "neutral stance". Each archer has a particular preference, but mostly this term indicates that the leg furthest from the shooting line is a half to a whole foot-length from the other foot, on the ground. To load, the bow is pointed toward the ground, tipped slightly clockwise of vertical (for a right handed shooter) and the shaft of the arrow is placed on the arrow rest or shelf. The back of the arrow is attached to the bowstring with the nock (a small locking groove located at the proximal end of the arrow). This step is called "nocking the arrow". Typical arrows with three vanes should be oriented such that a single vane, the "cock feather", is pointing away from the bow, to improve the clearance of the arrow as it passes the arrow rest. A compound bow is fitted with a special type of arrow rest, known as a launcher, and the arrow is usually loaded with the cock feather/vane pointed either up, or down, depending upon the type of launcher being used. The bowstring and arrow are held with three fingers, or with a mechanical arrow release. Most commonly, for finger shooters, the index finger is placed above the arrow and the next two fingers below, although several other techniques have their adherents around the world, involving three fingers below the arrow, or an arrow pinching technique. Instinctive shooting is a technique eschewing sights and is often preferred by traditional archers (shooters of longbows and recurves). In either the split finger or three finger under case, the string is usually placed in the first or second joint, or else on the pads of the fingers. When using a mechanical release aid, the release is hooked onto the D-loop. [64] Another type of string hold, used on traditional bows, is the type favoured by the Mongol warriors, known as the "thumb release", style. This involves using the thumb to draw the string, with the fingers curling around the thumb to add some support. To release the string, the fingers are opened out and the thumb relaxes to allow the string to slide off the thumb. When using this type of release, the arrow should rest on the same side of the bow as the drawing hand i.e. Left hand draw = arrow on left side of bow. The archer then raises the bow and draws the string, with varying alignments for vertical versus slightly canted bow positions. This is often one fluid motion for shooters of recurves and longbows, which tend to vary from archer to archer. Compound shooters often experience a slight jerk during the drawback, at around the last 4 cm (1.6 in), where the draw weight is at its maximum—before relaxing into a comfortable stable full draw position. The archer draws the string hand towards the face, where it should rest lightly at a fixed anchor point. This point is consistent from shot to shot, and is usually at the corner of the mouth, on the chin, to the cheek, or to the ear, depending on preferred shooting style. The archer holds the bow arm outwards, toward the target. The elbow of this arm should be rotated so that the inner elbow is perpendicular to the ground, though archers with hyper extendable elbows tend to angle the inner elbow toward the ground, as exemplified by the Korean archer Jang Yong-Ho . This keeps the forearm out of the way of the bowstring. In modern form, the archer stands erect, forming a "T". The archer's lower trapezius muscles are used to pull the arrow to the anchor point. Some modern recurve bows are equipped with a mechanical device, called a clicker, which produces a clicking sound when the archer reaches the correct draw length. , traditional English Longbow shooters step "into the bow", exerting force with both the bow arm and the string hand arm simultaneously, especially when using bows having draw weights from 45 kg (99 lb) to over 80 kg (180 lb). Heavily stacked traditional bows (recurves, long bows, and the like) are released immediately upon reaching full draw at maximum weight, whereas compound bows reach their maximum weight around the last 4 cm (1.6 in), dropping holding weight significantly at full draw. Compound bows are often held at full draw for a short time to achieve maximum accuracy. The arrow is typically released by relaxing the fingers of the drawing hand (see bow draw ), or triggering the mechanical release aid. Usually the release aims to keep the drawing arm rigid, the bow hand relaxed, and the arrow is moved back using the back muscles, as opposed to using just arm motions. An archer should also pay attention to the recoil or follow through of his or her body, as it may indicate problems with form (technique) that affect accuracy. Aiming methods[ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2011) (
Present since inaugural 1896 Olympics Official website www.fie.ch www.fie.org Fencing is a combat sport that features sword fighting. [1] The three disciplines of modern fencing are the foil , the épée , and the sabre (also saber); each discipline uses a different kind of blade, which shares the same name, and employs its own rules. Most competitive fencers specialise in one discipline. The modern sport gained prominence near the end of the 19th century and is based on the traditional skill set of swordsmanship . The Italian school altered the historical European martial art of classical fencing , and the French school later refined that system. Scoring points in a fencing competition is done by making contact with an opponent. The 1904 Olympics Games featured a fourth discipline of fencing known as singlestick , but it was dropped after that year and is not a part of modern fencing. Competitive fencing was one of the first sports to be featured in the Olympics and, along with athletics , cycling , swimming , and gymnastics , has been featured in every modern Olympics. Competitive fencing Further information: Fédération Internationale d'Escrime Fencing is governed by the Fédération Internationale d'Escrime (FIE), headquartered in Lausanne , Switzerland. The FIE is composed of 155 national federations, each of which is recognised by its state Olympic Committee as the sole representative of Olympic-style fencing in that country. [2] Rules Main article: Fencing rules The FIE maintains the current rules used by major international events, including world cups, world championships and the Olympic Games. [3] The FIE handles proposals to change the rules at an annual congress. [4] Universities and schools See also: Collegiate Fencing and High School Fencing University students compete internationally at the World University Games . The United States holds two national-level university tournaments (the NCAA championship and the USACFC National Championships). [5] The BUCS holds fencing tournaments in the United Kingdom. Many universities in Ontario, Canada have fencing teams that participate in an annual inter-university competition called the OUA Finals. National fencing organisations have set up programmes to encourage more students to fence. Examples include the Regional Youth Circuit program [6] in the US and the Leon Paul Youth Development series in the UK. The UK hosts two national competitions in which schools compete against each other directly: the Public Schools Fencing Championship, a competition only open to Independent Schools, [7] and the Scottish Secondary Schools Championships, open to all secondary schools in Scotland. It contains both teams and individual events and is highly anticipated. Schools organise matches directly against one another and school age pupils can compete individually in the British Youth Championships. In recent years, attempts have been made to introduce fencing to a wider and younger audience, by using foam and plastic swords, which require much less protective equipment. This makes it much less expensive to provide classes, and thus easier to take fencing to a wider range of schools than traditionally has been the case. There is even a competition series in Scotland – the Plastic-and-Foam Fencing FunLeague [8] – specifically for Primary and early Secondary school-age children using this equipment. History See also: History of physical training and fitness Fencing School at Leiden University , Netherlands, 1610 Fencing traces its roots to the development of swordsmanship for duels and self-defence . The oldest surviving treatise on western fencing is the Royal Armouries Ms. I.33 , also known as the Tower manuscript, written c. 1300 in present-day Germany, [9] which discusses the usage of the arming sword together with the buckler . It was followed by a number of treatises, primarily from Germany and Italy, with the oldest surviving Italian treatise being Fior di Battaglia by Fiore dei Liberi , written c. 1400. However, because they were written for the context of a knightly duel with a primary focus on archaic weapons such as the arming sword, longsword , or poleaxe , these older treatises do not really stand in continuity with modern fencing. From the 16th century onward, the Italian school of fencing would be dominated by the Bolognese or Dardi-School of fencing, named after its founder, Filippo Dardi, a Bolognese fencing master and Professor of Geometry at the University of Bologna. Unlike the previous traditions, the Bolognese school would primarily focus on the sidesword being either used alone or in combination with a buckler, a cape, a parrying dagger , or dual-wielded with another sidesword, though some Bolognese masters, such as Achille Marozo , would still cover the usage of the two-handed greatsword or spadone. The Bolognese school would eventually spread outside of Italy and lay the foundation for modern fencing, eclipsing both older Italian and German traditions. This was partially due to the German schools' focus on archaic weapons such as the longsword, but also due to a general decline in fencing within Germany. The mechanics of modern fencing originated in the 18th century in an Italian school of fencing of the Renaissance, and under their influence, were improved by the French school of fencing. [10] [11] The Spanish school of fencing stagnated and was replaced by the Italian and French schools. Development into a sport The shift towards fencing as a sport rather than as military training happened from the mid-18th century, and was led by Domenico Angelo , who established a fencing academy, Angelo's School of Arms, in Carlisle House , Soho , London in 1763. [12] There, he taught the aristocracy the fashionable art of swordsmanship . His school was run by three generations of his family and dominated the art of European fencing for almost a century. [13] 1763 fencing print from Domenico Angelo 's instruction book. Angelo was instrumental in turning fencing into an athletic sport. He established the essential rules of posture and footwork that still govern modern sport fencing, although his attacking and parrying methods were still much different from current practice. Although he intended to prepare his students for real combat, he was the first fencing master to emphasise the health and sporting benefits of fencing more than its use as a killing art, particularly in his influential book L'École des armes (The School of Fencing), published in 1763. [13] Basic conventions were collated and set down during the 1880s by the French fencing master Camille Prévost. It was during this time that many officially recognised fencing associations began to appear in different parts of the world, such as the Amateur Fencers League of America was founded in 1891, the Amateur Fencing Association of Great Britain in 1902, and the Fédération Nationale des Sociétés d’Escrime et Salles d’Armes de France in 1906. [14] The first regularised fencing competition was held at the inaugural Grand Military Tournament and Assault at Arms in 1880, held at the Royal Agricultural Hall , in Islington in June.  The Tournament featured a series of competitions between army officers and soldiers. Each bout was fought for five hits and the foils were pointed with black to aid the judges. [15] The Amateur Gymnastic & Fencing Association drew up an official set of fencing regulations in 1896. Fencing was part of the Olympic Games in the summer of 1896 . Sabre events have been held at every Summer Olympics ; foil events have been held at every Summer Olympics except 1908; épée events have been held at every Summer Olympics except in the summer of 1896 because of unknown reasons. Starting with épée in 1933, side judges were replaced by the Laurent-Pagan electrical scoring apparatus, [16] with an audible tone and a red or green light indicating when a touch landed. Foil was automated in 1956, sabre in 1988. The scoring box reduced the bias in judging, and permitted more accurate scoring of faster actions, lighter touches, and more touches to the back and flank than before. [17] Weapons Each of the three weapons in fencing has its own rules and strategies. Foil Main article: Foil (fencing) The foil is a light thrusting weapon with a maximum weight of 500 grams. The foil targets the torso, but not the arms or legs. The foil has a small circular hand guard that serves to protect the hand from direct stabs. As the hand is not a valid target in foil, this is primarily for safety. Touches are scored only with the tip; hits with the side of the blade do not register on the electronic scoring apparatus (and do not halt the action). Touches that land outside the target area (called an off-target touch and signalled by a distinct color on the scoring apparatus) stop the action, but are not scored. Only a single touch can be awarded to either fencer at the end of a phrase. If both fencers land touches within 300 ms (± 25 ms tolerance)Material rules [18] to register two lights on the machine, the referee uses the rules of "right of way" to determine which fencer is awarded the touch, or if an off-target hit has priority over a valid hit, in which case no touch is awarded. If the referee is unable to determine which fencer has right of way, no touch is awarded. Épée Main article: Épée The épée is a thrusting weapon like the foil, but heavier, with a maximum total weight of 775 grams. In épée, the entire body is a valid target. The hand guard on the épée is a large circle that extends towards the pommel, effectively covering the hand, which is a valid target in épée. Like foil, all hits must be with the tip and not the sides of the blade. Hits with the side of the blade do not register on the electronic scoring apparatus (and do not halt the action). As the entire body is a legal target, there is no concept of an off-target touch, except if the fencer accidentally strikes the floor, setting off the light and tone on the scoring apparatus. Unlike foil and sabre, épée does not use "right of way", simultaneous touches to both fencers, known as "double touches." However, if the score is tied in a match at the last point and a double touch is scored, the point is null and void. Sabre Main article: Sabre (fencing) The sabre is a light cutting and thrusting weapon that targets the entire body above the waist, including the head and both the hands. Sabre is the newest weapon to be used. Like the foil, the maximum legal weight of a sabre is 500 grams. The hand guard on the sabre extends from hilt to the point at which the blade connects to the pommel. This guard is generally turned outwards during sport to protect the sword arm from touches. Hits with the entire blade or point are valid. As in foil, touches that land outside the target area are not scored. However, unlike foil, these off-target touches do not stop the action, and the fencing continues. In the case of both fencers landing a scoring touch, the referee determines which fencer receives the point for the action, again through the use of "right of way". Equipment Protective clothing Most personal protective equipment for fencing is made of tough cotton or nylon . Kevlar was added to top level uniform pieces (jacket, breeches, underarm protector, lamé, and the bib of the mask) following the death of Vladimir Smirnov at the 1982 World Championships in Rome . However, Kevlar is degraded by both ultraviolet light and chlorine , which can complicate cleaning. Other ballistic fabrics, such as Dyneema , have been developed that resist puncture , and which do not degrade the way that Kevlar does. FIE rules state that tournament wear must be made of fabric that resists a force of 800 newtons (180 lbf), and that the mask bib must resist twice that amount. The complete fencing kit includes: Jacket The jacket is form-fitting, and has a strap (croissard) that passes between the legs. In sabre fencing, jackets are cut along the waist.[ clarification needed ] A small gorget of folded fabric is sewn in around the collar to prevent an opponent's blade from slipping under the mask and along the jacket upwards towards the neck. Fencing instructors may wear a heavier jacket, such as one reinforced by plastic foam, to deflect the frequent hits an instructor endures. Plastron A plastron is an underarm protector worn underneath the jacket. It provides double protection on the side of the sword arm and upper arm. There is no seam under the arm, which would line up with the jacket seam and provide a weak spot. Glove The sword hand is protected by a glove with a gauntlet that prevents blades from going up the sleeve and causing injury. The glove also improves grip. Breeches Breeches or knickers are short trousers that end just below the knee.  The breeches are required to have 10 cm of overlap with the jacket.  Most are equipped with suspenders (braces). Socks Fencing socks are long enough to cover the knee; some cover most of the thigh. Shoes Fencing shoes have flat soles, and are reinforced on the inside for the back foot, and in the heel for the front foot. The reinforcement prevents wear from lunging. Mask The fencing mask has a bib that protects the neck. The mask should support 12 kilograms (26 lb) on the metal mesh and 350 newtons (79 lbf) of penetration resistance on the bib. FIE regulations dictate that masks must withstand 25 kilograms (55 lb) on the mesh and 1,600 newtons (360 lbf) on the bib. Some modern masks have a see-through visor in the front of the mask. These have been used at high level competitions (World Championships etc.), however, they are currently banned in foil and épée by the FIE, following a 2009 incident in which a visor was pierced during the European Junior Championship competition. There are foil, sabre, and three-weapon masks. Chest protector A chest protector, made of plastic, is worn by female fencers and, sometimes, by males. Fencing instructors also wear them, as they are hit far more often during training than their students. In foil fencing, the hard surface of a chest protector decreases the likelihood that a hit registers. Lamé A lamé is a layer of electrically conductive material worn over the fencing jacket in foil and sabre fencing. The lamé covers the entire target area, and makes it easier to determine whether a hit fell within the target area. (In épée fencing the lamé is unnecessary, since the target area spans the competitor's entire body.) In sabre fencing, the lamé's sleeves end in a straight line across the wrist; in foil fencing, the lamé is sleeveless. A body cord is necessary to register scoring. It attaches to the weapon and runs inside the jacket sleeve, then down the back and out to the scoring box. In sabre and foil fencing, the body cord connects to the lamé in order to create a circuit to the scoring box. Sleeve An instructor or master may wear a protective sleeve or a leg leather to protect their fencing arm or leg, respectively. Elements of protective clothing
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sport requiring strength and flexibility Gymnastics Began in ancient Greece ( Sparta and Athens ) Characteristics - 1 gymnastic sports governed by FIG - other disciplines not governed by FIG Equipment Yes, Summer Olympics Gymnastics is a type of sport that includes physical exercises requiring balance , strength , flexibility , agility , coordination , artistry and endurance . [1] The movements involved in gymnastics contribute to the development of the arms, legs, shoulders, back, chest, and abdominal muscle groups. Gymnastics evolved from exercises used by the ancient Greeks that included skills for mounting and dismounting a horse, and from circus performance skills. [2] The governing body for competition in gymnastics throughout the world is the Fédération Internationale de Gymnastique (FIG). Eight sports are governed by the FIG, including gymnastics for all, men's and women's artistic gymnastics , rhythmic gymnastics , trampolining (including double mini-trampoline), tumbling , acrobatic , aerobic , and parkour . [3] Disciplines not recognized by FIG include wheel gymnastics , aesthetic group gymnastics , TeamGym , and mallakhamba . Participants in gymnastics-related sports include young children, recreational-level athletes, and competitive athletes at all levels of skill. Etymology[ edit ] The word gymnastics derives from the common Greek adjective γυμνός ( gymnos ), [4] by way of the related verb γυμνάζω (gymnazo), whose meaning is to "train naked", "train in gymnastic exercise", generally "to train, to exercise". [5] The verb had this meaning because athletes in ancient times exercised and competed without clothing. Friedrich Ludwig Jahn , the "father of gymnastics" Gymnastics can be traced to exercise to ancient Greece specifically to Sparta and Athens. Exercise of that time was documented by Philostratus' [6] work Gymnastics: The Ethics of an Athletic Aesthetic. The original term for the practice of gymnastics is from the related Greek verb γυμνάζω (gumnázō), which translates as "to train naked or nude" because young men exercising trained without clothing. In ancient Greece, physical fitness was a highly valued attribute in both men and women. It was not until after the Romans conquered Greece in 146BC that gymnastics became more formalized and used to train men in warfare. [7] Based on Philostratus' claim that gymnastics is a form of wisdom, comparable to philosophy, poetry, music, geometry, and astronomy, [6] Athens combined this more physical training with the education of the mind. At the Palestra, a physical education training center, the discipline of educating the body and the mind were combined allowing for a form of gymnastics that was more aesthetic and individual and that left behind the focus on strictness, discipline, the emphasis on defeating records, and a focus on strength. [8] Don Francisco Amorós y Ondeano , a Spanish colonel, born on February 19, 1770, in Valencia and who died on August 8, 1848, in Paris, was the first person to introduce educative gymnastics in France. The German Friedrich Ludwig Jahn began the German gymnastics movement 1811 in Berlin which led to the invention of the parallel bars , rings , high bar , the pommel horse and the vault horse . Germans Charles Beck and Charles Follen and American John Neal brought the first wave of gymnastics to the United States in the 1820s. Beck opened the first gymnasium in the US in 1825 at the Round Hill School in Northampton, Massachusetts. [9] Follen opened the first college gymnasium and the first public gymnasium in the US in 1826 at Harvard College and in Boston, Massachusetts, respectively. [10] Neal was the first American to open a public gymnasium in the US in Portland, Maine in 1827. [11] He also documented and promoted these early efforts in the American Journal of Education [12] and The Yankee , helping to establish the American branch of the movement. [13] Early 20th-century gymnastics in Stockholm, Sweden The Federation of International Gymnastics (FIG) was founded in Liege in 1881. [14] By the end of the nineteenth century, men's gymnastics competition was popular enough to be included in the first modern Olympic Games in 1896. From then on until the early 1950s, both national and international competitions involved a changing variety of exercises gathered under the rubric, gymnastics, that included, for example, synchronized team floor calisthenics, rope climbing, high jumping, running, and horizontal ladder. During the 1920s, women organized and participated in gymnastics events. The first women's Olympic competition was limited, only involving synchronized calisthenics and track and field. These games were held in 1928 in Amsterdam.  By 1954, Olympic Games apparatus and events for both men and women had been standardized in modern format, and uniform grading structures (including a point system from 1 to 15) had been agreed upon. In 1930, the first UK mass movement organisation of women in gymnastics, the Women's League of Health and Beauty, was founded by Mary Bagot Stack in London. [15] At this time, Soviet gymnasts astounded the world with highly disciplined and difficult performances, setting a precedent that continues. Television has helped publicize and initiate a modern age of gymnastics. Both men's and women's gymnastics now attract considerable international interest, and excellent gymnasts can be found on every continent. In 2006, a new points system for Artistic gymnastics was put into play. With an A Score (or D score) being the difficulty score, which as of 2009 is based on the top 8 high scoring elements in a routine (excluding Vault). The B Score (or E Score), is the score for execution and is given for how well the skills are performed. [16] Main article: Artistic gymnastics Nadia Comăneci in 1976. The artistry and grace of Comăneci and Soviet gymnast Olga Korbut gave the sport global popularity. [17] Artistic Gymnastics is usually divided into Men's and Women's Gymnastics. Men compete on six events: Floor Exercise , Pommel Horse , Still Rings , Vault , Parallel Bars , and Horizontal Bar , while women compete on four: Vault , Uneven Bars , Balance Beam , and Floor Exercise . In some countries, women at one time competed on the rings, high bar, and parallel bars (for example, in the 1950s in the USSR ). In 2006, FIG introduced a new point system for Artistic gymnastics in which scores are no longer limited to 10 points. The system is used in the US for elite level competition. [16] Unlike the old code of points, there are two separate scores, an execution score and a difficulty score. In the previous system, the execution score was the only score. It was and still is out of 10.00, except for short exercises. During the gymnast's performance, the judges deduct this score only. A fall, on or off the event, is a 1.00 deduction, in elite level gymnastics. The introduction of the difficulty score is a significant change. The gymnast's difficulty score is based on what elements they perform and is subject to change if they do not perform or complete all the skills, or they do not connect a skill meant to be connected to another. Connection bonuses are where deviation happens most commonly between the intended and actual difficulty scores, as it can be difficult to connect multiple flight elements. It is very hard to connect skills if the first skill is not performed correctly. The new code of points allows the gymnasts to gain higher scores based on the difficulty of the skills they perform as well as their execution. There is no maximum score for difficulty, as it can keep increasing as the difficulty of the skills increase. Competitive events for women in artistic gymnastics[ edit ] Main article: Vault (gymnastics) In the vaulting events, gymnasts sprint down a 25 metres (82 ft) runway, to take off  onto a vault board (or perform a roundoff or handspring entry onto a vault board),  to land momentarily inverted on the hands on the vaulting horse or vaulting table (pre-flight segment), then propel themselves forward or backward off that platform to a two-footed landing (post-flight segment). Every gymnast starts at a different point on the vault runway depending on their height and strength. The post-flight segment may include one or more multiple saltos, or twisting movements. A round-off entry vault, called a Yurchenko , is a commonly performed vault in the higher levels in gymnastics. When performing a Yurchenko, gymnasts round-off so their hands are on the runway while their feet land on the vault board. From the round-off position, the gymnast travels backward so that the hands land on the vaulting table. The gymnast then blocks off the vaulting platform into various twisting and/or somersaulting combinations. The post-flight segment brings the gymnast to her feet.  Less difficult vaults include taking off from the vault board with both feet at the same time and either doing a front handspring or round-off onto the vaulting table. In 2001, the traditional vaulting horse was replaced with a new apparatus, sometimes known as a tongue, horse, or vaulting table. The new apparatus is more stable, wider, and longer than the older vaulting horse, approximately 1 m in length and 1 m in width, giving gymnasts a larger blocking surface. This apparatus is thus considered safer than the vaulting horse used in the past. With the addition of this new, safer vaulting table, gymnasts are attempting more difficult vaults. [18] Gymnast on uneven bars Main article: Uneven bars On the uneven bars, the gymnast performs a timed routine on two parallel horizontal bars set at different heights. These bars are made of fiberglass covered in wood laminate , to prevent them from breaking. In the past, bars were made of wood, but the bars were prone to breaking, providing an incentive to switch to newer technologies. The height of the bars may be adjusted by 5 cm to the size needed by individual gymnasts, although the distance between bars cannot be changed for individual gymnasts in elite competition. In the past, the uneven parallel bars were closer together. The bars have been moved increasingly further apart, allowing gymnasts to perform swinging, circling, transitional, and release moves that may pass over, under, and between the two bars. At the Elite level, movements must pass through the handstand. Gymnasts often mount the uneven bars using a springboard or a small mat. Gymnasts may use chalk (MgCO3) and grips (a leather strip with holes for fingers to protect hands and improve performance) when performing this event. The chalk helps take the moisture out of gymnasts' hands to decrease friction and prevent rips (tears to the skin of the hands); dowel grips help gymnasts grip the bar. Main article: Balance beam The gymnast performs a choreographed routine of up to 90 seconds in length consisting of leaps, acrobatic skills, somersaults, turns and dance elements on a padded beam. The beam is 125 centimetres (4 ft 1 in) from the ground, 5 metres (16 ft 5 in) long, and 10.16 centimetres (4.00 in) wide. [19] This stationary object can also be adjusted, to be raised higher or lower. The gymnast begins the 70-90 seconds exercise by mounting the beam by either a vault or a jump. The event requires balance, flexibility, grace, poise, and strength. Main article: Floor (gymnastics) The event in gymnastics performed on the floor is called floor exercise. The English abbreviation for the event in gymnastics scoring is FX. In the past, the floor exercise event was executed on the bare floor or mats such as wrestling mats. The floor event now occurs on a carpeted 12m × 12m square, usually consisting of hard foam over a layer of plywood , which is supported by springs generally called a spring floor. This provides a firm surface that provides extra bounce or spring when compressed, allowing gymnasts to achieve greater height and a softer landing after the composed skill. Gymnasts perform a choreographed routine for up to 90 seconds in the floor exercise event. Depending on the level, the gymnast may choose their own routine; however some levels have compulsory routines, where default music must be played. Levels three to six the music is the same for each levels along with the skills within the routine. However, recently, the levels have switched. Now, levels 6–10 are optional levels and they get to have custom routines made. In the optional levels (levels six to ten) there are skill requirements for the routine but the athlete is able to pick her own music without any words. The routine should consist of tumbling passes, series of jumps, leaps, dance elements, acrobatic skills, and turns, or pivots, on one foot. A gymnast can perform up to four tumbling passes, each of which usually includes at least one flight element without hand support. Each level of gymnastics requires the athlete to perform a different number of tumbling passes. In level 7 in the United States, a gymnast is required to do 2–3, and in levels 8–10, at least 3–4 tumbling passes are required. [20] Scoring[ edit ] Scoring for both Junior Olympic and NCAA level gymnastics uses a 10.0 scale. Levels below Level 9 start from a 10.0 automatically if all requirements for an event are met. Levels 9 and 10, and NCAA gymnastics all start below a 10.0 and require gymnastics to acquire bonus points through connections and skills to increase their start value to a 10.0. During a routine, deductions will be made by the judges for flaws in the form of the technique of a skill. For example, steps on landings or flexed feet can range from .05-.1 off, depending on the severity of the mistake. [21] Competitive events for men in artistic gymnastics[ edit ] Main article: Floor (gymnastics) Male gymnasts also perform on a 12meter x 12meter spring floor. A series of tumbling passes are performed to demonstrate flexibility, strength, and balance. Strength skills include circles, scales, and press handstands. Men's floor routines usually have multiple passes that have to total between 60–70 seconds and are performed without music, unlike the women's event. Rules require that male gymnasts touch each corner of the floor at least once during their routine. Main article: Pommel Horse A typical pommel horse exercise involves both single leg and double leg work. Single leg skills are generally found in the form of scissors, an element often done on the pommels. Double leg work, however, is the main staple of this event. The gymnast swings both legs in a circular motion (clockwise or counterclockwise depending on preference) and performs such skills on all parts of the apparatus. To make the exercise more challenging, gymnasts will often include variations on a typical circling skill by turning (moores and spindles) or by straddling their legs (Flares). Routines end when the gymnast performs a dismount, either by swinging his body over the horse or landing after a handstand variation. Main article: Still Rings The rings are suspended on wire cable from a point 5.75 meters from the floor. The gymnasts must perform a routine demonstrating balance, strength, power, and dynamic motion while preventing the rings themselves from swinging. At least one static strength move is required, but some gymnasts may include two or three. A routine ends with a dismount. Main article: Vault (gymnastics) Gymnasts sprint down a runway, which is a maximum of 25 meters in length, before hurdling onto a springboard. The gymnast is allowed to choose where they start on the runway. The body position is maintained while punching (blocking using only a shoulder movement) the vaulting platform. The gymnast then rotates to a standing position. In advanced gymnastics, multiple twists and somersaults may be added before landing. Successful vaults depend on the speed of the run, the length of the hurdle, the power the gymnast generates from the legs and shoulder girdle, the kinesthetic awareness in the air, how well they stuck the landing, and the speed of rotation in the case of more difficult and complex vaults. Main article: Parallel bars Men perform on two bars executing a series of swings, balances, and releases that require great strength and coordination. The width between the bars is adjustable depending upon the actual needs of the gymnasts and usually 2m high. Main article: Horizontal bar A 2.8  cm thick steel or fiberglass bar raised 2.5 m above the landing area is all the gymnast has to hold onto as he performs giant swings or giants (forward or backward revolutions around the bar in the handstand position), release skills, twists, and changes of direction. By using all of the momentum from giants and then releasing at the proper point, enough height can be achieved for spectacular dismounts, such as a triple-back salto. Leather grips are usually used to help maintain a grip on the bar, and to prevent rips. While training for this event, straps are often used to ensure that the gymnast does not fall off the bar as they are learning new skills. As with women, male gymnasts are also judged on all of their events including their execution, degree of difficulty , and overall presentation skills. Main article: Rhythmic gymnastics According to FIG rules, only women compete in rhythmic gymnastics. This is a sport that combines elements of ballet , gymnastics, dance , and apparatus manipulation. The sport involves the performance of five separate routines with the use of five apparatus; ball, ribbon, hoop, clubs, rope—on a floor area, with a much greater emphasis on the aesthetic rather than the acrobatic. There are also group routines consisting of 5 gymnasts and 5 apparatuses of their choice. Rhythmic routines are scored out of a possible 30 points; the score for artistry (choreography and music) is averaged with the score for the difficulty of the moves and then added to the score for execution. [22] International competitions are split between Juniors, under sixteen by their year of birth; and Seniors, for women sixteen and over again by their year of birth. Gymnasts in Russia and Europe typically start training at a very young age and those at their peak are typically in their late teens (15–19) or early twenties. The largest events in the sport are the Olympic Games , World Championships , European Championships , World Cup and Grand-Prix Series . The first World Championships were held in 1963 with its first appearance at the Olympics in 1984. Rhythmic gymnastics apparatus[ edit ] Evgenia Kanaeva doing a Split leap in her hoop routine Soviet Galina Shugurova performing an Attitude balance in her ball apparatus Ball The ball is made of either rubber or synthetic material (pliable plastic) provided it possesses the same elasticity as rubber. It is from 18 to 20  cm in diameter and must have a minimum weight of 400g. The ball can be of any color and should rest in the gymnast's hand, not the wrist. Fundamental elements of a ball routine include throwing, bouncing, and rolling. The gymnast must use both hands and work on the whole floor area while showing continuous flowing movement. The ball is to emphasize the gymnast's flowing lines and body difficulty. Hoop A hoop is an apparatus in rhythmic gymnastics and may be made of plastic or wood, provided that it retains its shape during the routine. The interior diameter is from 51 to 90  cm and the hoop must weigh a minimum of 300g. The hoop may be of natural color or be part of fully covered by one or several colors, and it may be covered with adhesive tape either of the same or different colors as the hoop. Fundamental requirements of a hoop routine include rotation around the hand or body and rolling, as well as swings, circles, throws, and passes through and over the hoop. The routines in hoop involve mastery in both apparatus handling and body difficulties like leaps, jumps, and pivots. Ribbon The ribbon is made of satin or another similar material cloth of any color and may be multi-colored as well as have designs on it. The ribbon itself must be at least 35g (1 oz), 4–6 cm (1.6–2.4") in width and for senior category a minimum length of 6m (20') (5m (16.25') for juniors). The ribbon must be in one piece. The end that is attached to the stick is doubled for a maximum length of 1m (3'). This is stitched down both sides. At the top, a very thin reinforcement or rows of machine stitching for a maximum length of 5  cm is authorized. This extremity may end in a strap, or have an eyelet (a small hole, edged with buttonhole stitch or a metal circle), to permit attaching the ribbon. The ribbon is fixed to the stick by means of a supple attachment such as thread, nylon cord, or a series of articulated rings. The attachment has a maximum length of 7 cm (2.8"), not counting the strap or metal ring at the end of the stick where it will be fastened. Compulsory elements for the ribbon include flicks, circles, snakes and spirals, and throws. It requires a high degree of co-ordination to form the spirals and circles as any knots which may accidentally form in the ribbon are penalised. During a ribbon routine, large, smooth and flowing movements are looked for. Clubs Multi-piece clubs are the most popular clubs. The club is built along an internal rod, providing a base on which a handle made of polyolefin plastic is wrapped, providing an airspace between it and the internal rod. This airspace provides flex, cushioning impact, making the club softer on the hands. Foam ends and knobs further cushion the club. Multi-piece clubs are made in both a thin European style or larger bodied American style and in various lengths, generally ranging from 19 to 21 inches (480 to 530 mm). The handles and bodies are typically wrapped with decorative plastics and tapes. The skills involved are apparatus mastery and body elements, Clubs are thrown from alternate hands; each passes underneath the other clubs and is caught in the opposite hand to the one from which it was thrown. At its simplest, each club rotates once per throw, the handle moving down and away from the throwing hand at first. However, double and triple spins are frequently performed, allowing the club to be thrown higher for more advanced patterns and to allow tricks such as 360s to be performed underneath. Rope This apparatus may be made of hemp or a synthetic material which retains the qualities of lightness and suppleness. Its length is in proportion to the size of the gymnast. The rope should, when held down by the feet, reach both of the gymnasts' armpits. One or two knots at each end are for keeping hold of the rope while doing the routine. At the ends (to the exclusion of all other parts of the rope) an anti-slip material, either coloured or neutral may cover a maximum of 10 cm (3.94 in). The rope must be coloured, either all or partially and may either be of a uniform diameter or be progressively thicker in the center provided that this thickening is of the same material as the rope. The fundamental requirements of a rope routine include leaps and skipping. Other elements include swings, throws, circles, rotations and figures of eight. In 2011, the FIG decided to remove the use of rope from the program of senior individual competitions. It is still used in junior competitions and occasionally on the program for senior group competitions (eg. 2017–2018). [23] Men's rhythmic gymnastics[ edit ] Men's rhythmic gymnastics is related to both men's artistic gymnastics and wushu martial arts . It emerged in Japan from stick gymnastics. Stick gymnastics has been taught and performed for many years with the aim of improving physical strength and health. Male athletes are judged on some of the same physical abilities and skills as their female counterparts, such as hand/body-eye co-ordination, but tumbling, strength, power, and martial arts skills are the main focus, as opposed to flexibility and dance in women's rhythmic gymnastics. There are a growing number of participants, competing alone and on a team; it is most popular in Asia, especially in Japan where high school and university teams compete fiercely. As of 2002 [update] , there were 1000 men's rhythmic gymnasts in Japan.[ citation needed ] [24] The technical rules for the Japanese version of men's rhythmic gymnastics came around the 1970s. For individuals, only four types of apparatus are used: the double rings, the stick, the rope, and the clubs. Groups do not use any apparatus. The Japanese version includes tumbling performed on a spring floor. Points are awarded based a 10-point scale that measures the level of difficulty of the tumbling and apparatus handling. On November 27–29, 2003, Japan hosted first edition of the Men's Rhythmic Gymnastics World Championship. The events consist of: Double Rings Group Along with the Japanese version of Men's Rhythmic there is a Spanish version which uses the same format and rules as the FIG recognized form of Women's Rhythmic Gymnastics. Trampolining[ edit ] Trampolining and tumbling consists of four events, individual and synchronized trampoline, double mini trampoline, and tumbling (also known as power tumbling or rod floor). Since 2000, individual trampoline has been included in the Olympic Games. The first World Championships were held in 1964. Individual trampoline[ edit ] Individual routines in trampolining involve a build-up phase during which the gymnast jumps repeatedly to achieve height, followed by a sequence of ten bounces without pause during which the gymnast performs a sequence of aerial skills. Routines are marked out of a maximum score of 10 points. Additional points (with no maximum at the highest levels of competition) can be earned depending on the difficulty of the moves and the length of time taken to complete the ten skills which is an indication of the average height of the jumps. In high level competitions, there are two preliminary routines, one which has only two moves scored for difficulty and one where the athlete is free to perform any routine. This is followed by a final routine which is optional. Some competitions restart the score from zero for the finals, other add the final score to the preliminary results. Synchronized trampoline[ edit ] Synchronized trampoline is similar except that both competitors must perform the routine together and marks are awarded for synchronization as well as the form and difficulty of the moves. Main article: Double mini trampoline Double mini trampoline involves a smaller trampoline with a run-up, two scoring moves are performed per routine. Moves cannot be repeated in the same order on the double-mini during a competition. Skills can be repeated if a skill is competed as a mounter in one routine and a dismount in another. The scores are marked in a similar manner to individual trampoline. Main article: Tumbling (gymnastics) In Tumbling , athletes perform an explosive series of flips and twists down a sprung tumbling track. Scoring is similar to trampolining. Tumbling was originally contested as one of the events in Men's Artistic Gymnastics at the 1932 Summer Olympics , and in 1955 and 1959 at the Pan American Games . From 1974 to 1998 it was included as an event for both genders at the Acrobatic Gymnastics World Championships . The event has also been contested since 1976 at the Trampoline and Tumbling World Championships . Tumbling is competed along a 25 metre sprung tack with a 10 metre run up. A tumbling pass or run is a combination of 8 skills, with an entry skill, normally a round-off, to whips and into an end skill. Usually the end skill is the hardest skill of the pass. At the highest level, gymnasts perform transitional skills. These are skills which are not whips, but are double or triple somersaults (usually competed at the end of the run), but now competed in the middle of the run connected before and after by either a whip or a flick. Common Types of Skills in Tumbling Skill Explained Round-off A common entry skill seen in every type of gymnastics to turn horizontal speed into vertical speed. A round-off will most commonly be connected with a back tumbling skill, such as a backflip / back twist, or back handspring. Dismount The skill competed at the end of a routine, this is either a double/triple somersault, a twisting somersault or a combination somersault. Back Handspring A long somersault where a gymnast moves from feet to hands to feet again in a backwards motion. Whip A long, low and fast somersault done without the hands. This move is unique to tumbling and the trademark of the discipline. Double Somersault The tumbler launches into the air and rotates twice vertically around before landing on their feet. This skill is done in a tuck, pike or straight position. Triple Somersault The gymnasts launches into the air and rotates three times vertically before landing on their feet. This skill is done in a tuck or pike position and has yet to be competed in the straight position Twisting Somersault A single somersault in which the tumbler rotates horizontally. This is can be done as a single 'full' twist, a double twist or a triple twist. Combination Somersault A somersault that is a combination of double/triple and twisting skills. For example in a double twisting double straight, the gymnast will rotate twice vertically and twice horizontally before landing. The hardest combination somersaults performed would be either the full in triple pike in which a gymnasts rotates vertically three times in a pike position with a full twist in the first rotation or 'the miller' in which a gymnast rotates horizontally four times and vertically twice. Transition Skill This is where a gymnast performs either a double somersault or a combination somersault in the middle of their run as opposed to doing it as an end skill. No triple somersaults or combination somersaults involving a triple vertically rotation has yet to be competed. Competition is made up of a qualifying round and a finals round. There are two different types of competition in tumbling, individual and team. In the team event three gymnasts out of a team of four compete one run each, if one run fails the final member of the team is allowed to compete with the three highest scores being counted. In the individual event qualification, the competitor will compete two runs, one a straight pass (including double and triple somersaults) and a twisting pass (including full twisting whips and combination skills such as a full twisting double straight ’full in back’). In the final of the individual event, the competitor must compete two different runs which can be either twisting or straight but each run normally uses both types (using transition skills). Main article: Acrobatic gymnastics Acrobatic gymnastics (formerly Sport Acrobatics), often referred to as acro if involved with the sport, acrobatic sports or simply sports acro, is a group gymnastic discipline for both men and women. Acrobats in groups of two, three and four perform routines with the heads, hands and feet of their partners. They may, subject to regulations (e.g. no lyrics), pick their own music. There are four international age categories: 11–16, 12–18, 13–19, and Senior (15+), which are used in the World Championships and many other events around the world, including the European Championships and the World Games . All levels require a balance and dynamic routine; 12–18, 13–19, and Seniors are also required to perform a final (combined) routine. Currently, acrobatic gymnastics score is marked out of 30.00 for juniors, and can be higher at Senior FIG level based on difficulty: Difficulty – An open score, which is the sum of the difficulty values of elements (valued from the tables of difficulties) successfully performed in an exercise, divided by 100. This score is unlimited in senior competitions. Execution – Judges give a score out of 10.00 for technical performance (how well the skills are executed), which is then doubled to emphasize its importance. Artistic – Judges give a score out of 10.00 for artistry (the overall performance of the routine, namely choreography) There are five competitive event categories: Women's Pairs Main article: Aerobic gymnastics Aerobic gymnastics (formally Sport Aerobics) involves the performance of routines by individuals, pairs, trios, groups with 5 people, and aerobic dance and aerobic step(8 people). Strength, flexibility, and aerobic fitness rather than acrobatic or balance skills are emphasized. [25] Routines are performed for all individuals on a 7x7m floor and also for 12–14 and 15–17 trios and mixed pairs. From 2009, all senior trios and mixed pairs were required to be on the larger floor (10x10m), all groups also perform on this floor. Routines generally last 60–90 seconds depending on age of participant and routine category. The World Championships have been held since 1995. The events consist of: Main article: Parkour On January 28, 2018 Parkour, also known as freerunning, was given the go ahead to begin development as a FIG sport. [26] [27] The FIG is planning to run World Cup competitions from 2018 onwards and will hold the first Parkour World Championships in 2020. The events consist of: Women's Gymnastics[ edit ] Nadia Comăneci - The first gymnast to score a perfect 10 in the Olympics (1976). [28] Simone Biles - American gymnast known for her incredible difficulty and execution, multiple-time World and Olympic champion. [29] Olga Korbut - Known as the "Sparrow from Minsk," she gained international fame at the 1972 Munich Olympics. [30] Mary Lou Retton - The first American woman to win an Olympic all-around title (1984). [31] Svetlana Khorkina - Russian gymnast known for her artistry and numerous World titles. [32] Gabby Douglas - American gymnast who won the individual all-around champion at the 2012 Olympics. [33] Aly Raisman - American gymnast, two-time Olympian, and multiple-time medalist. [34] Kohei Uchimura - Japanese gymnast, often considered the greatest male gymnast of all time. [36] Vitaly Scherbo - Belarusian gymnast who won six gold medals at the 1992 Olympics. [37] Alexei Nemov - Russian gymnast known for his charisma and 12 Olympic medals.[ citation needed ] Bart Conner - American gymnast, two-time Olympic gold medalist. [38] Paul Hamm - First American male gymnast to win the Olympic all-around title. [39] Li Xiaopeng - Chinese gymnast, multiple-time World and Olympic champion. [40] Yuri Chechi - Italian gymnast, known as the "Lord of the Rings" for his success in the rings event. [41] Sawao Kato - Japanese gymnast, one of the most successful athletes in the history of the Olympics. [42] The following disciplines are not currently recognized by the Fédération Internationale de Gymnastique . Aesthetic group gymnastics[ edit ] Main article: Aesthetic group gymnastics Aesthetic Group Gymnastics (AGG) was developed from the Finnish "naisvoimistelu". It differs from Rhythmic Gymnastics in that body movement is large and continuous and teams are larger. Athletes do not use apparatus in international AGG competitions compared to Rhythmic Gymnastics where ball, ribbon, hoop and clubs are used on the floor area. The sport requires physical qualities such as flexibility, balance, speed, strength, coordination and sense of rhythm where movements of the body are emphasized through the flow, expression and aesthetic appeal. A good performance is characterized by uniformity and simultaneity. The competition program consists of versatile and varied body movements, such as body waves, swings, balances, pivots, jumps and leaps, dance steps, and lifts. The International Federation of Aesthetic Group Gymnastics (IFAGG) was established in 2003. [43] The first Aesthetic Group Gymnastics World Championships was held in 2000. [44] Main article: TeamGym TeamGym is a form of competition created by the European Union of Gymnastics , named originally EuroTeam. The first official competition was held in Finland in 1996. TeamGym events consist of three sections: women, men and mixed teams. Athletes compete in three different disciplines: floor, tumbling and trampette. In common for the performance is effective teamwork, good technique in the elements and spectacular acrobatic skills. [45] There is no World Championships however there has been a European Championships held since 2010. [46] Main article: Wheel gymnastics Wheel gymnasts do exercises in a large wheel known as the Rhönrad, gymnastics wheel, gym wheel, or German wheel, in the beginning also known as ayro wheel, aero wheel, and Rhon rod. There are four core categories of exercise: straight line, spiral, vault and cyr wheel. The first World Championships was held in 1995. [47] Main article: Mallakhamba Mallakhamba ( Marathi : मल्लखम्ब) is a traditional Indian sport in which a gymnast performs feats and poses in concert with a vertical wooden pole or rope. The word also refers to the pole used in the sport. Mallakhamba derives from the terms malla which denotes a wrestler and khamba which means a pole. Mallakhamba can therefore be translated to English as "pole gymnastics". [48] On April 9, 2013, the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh declared mallakhamba as the state sport. In February 2019 the first Mallahkhamb World Championship was held in Mumbai Non-competitive gymnastics[ edit ] General gymnastics also known as Gymnastics for All enables people of all ages and abilities to participate in performance groups of 6 to more than 150 athletes. They can perform synchronized, choreographed routines. Troupes may consist of both genders and are separated into age divisions. The largest general gymnastics exhibition is the quadrennial World Gymnaestrada which was first held in 1939. In 1984 Gymnastics for All was officially recognized first as a Sport Program by the FIG (International Gymnastic Federation), and subsequently by national gymnastic federations worldwide with participants that now number 30 million. Non-competitive gymnastics is considered useful for its health benefits. [49] Levels[ edit ] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it . (June 2020) In the US, gymnastics levels for women called the Junior Olympic (JO) Program begins at 1 and goes to 10. The two kinds of levels are Compulsory (levels 1-5) and Optional (levels 6-10). Each level (1-10) has its own set of unique rules that ascend in difficulty level to level. Elite can follow 10 and is generally considered Olympic level. [50] Men's gymnastics or The Junior Olympic Program consists of ten levels of training or competition with multiple age groups at each level creating opportunities for athletes and coaches to participate and or compete. [51] Since 2015, Canada has adopted the women’s JO Program, with some modifications, for use in the Provinces and Territories. [52] Scoring (code of points)[ edit ] Main article: Code of Points An artistic gymnast's score comes from deductions taken from the start value of a routine's elements. The start value of a routine is based on the difficulty of the elements the gymnast attempts and whether or not the gymnast meets composition requirements. The composition requirements are different for each apparatus. This score is called the D score. [53] Deductions in execution and artistry are taken from a maximum of 10.0. This score is called the E score. [54] The final score is calculated by adding the D and E score. [55] The current method of scoring, by adding D and E score to give the final score has been in place since 2006. [56] The current method is called "open-end" scoring because there is no theoretical cap (although there is practical cap) to the D-score and hence the total possible score for a routine. [57] Before 2006, a gymnast's final score is deducted from a possible maximum of 10 for a routine. A Code of Points or guidelines of scoring a routine's difficulty and execution is slightly revised for each quadrennium, or period of four years culminating in the Olympics year. Landing[ edit ] In a tumbling pass, dismount, or vault, landing is the final phase, following take-off and flight [58] This is a critical skill in terms of execution in competition scores, general performance, and injury occurrence. Without the necessary magnitude of energy dissipation during impact, the risk of sustaining injuries during somersaulting increases. These injuries commonly occur at the lower extremities such as cartilage lesions, ligament tears, and bone bruises/fractures. [59] To avoid such injuries, and to receive a high-performance score, proper technique must be used by the gymnast. "The subsequent ground contact or impact landing phase must be achieved using a safe, aesthetic, and well-executed double foot landing." [60] A successful landing in gymnastics is classified as soft, meaning the knee and hip joints are at greater than 63 degrees of flexion. [58] A higher flight phase results in a higher vertical ground reaction force. Vertical ground reaction force (vGRF) represents an external force which the gymnasts have to overcome with their muscle force and affects the gymnasts' linear and angular momentum. Another important variable that affects linear and angular momentum is the time the landing takes. Gymnasts can decrease the impact force by increasing the time taken to perform the landing. Gymnasts can achieve this by increasing hip, knee and ankle amplitude. [58] Former apparatus and events[ edit ] Main article: Rope climbing Generally, competitors climbed either a 6m (6.1m = 20  ft in the US) or an 8m (7.6m = 25  ft in the US), 38  mm diameter (1.5-inch) natural fiber rope for speed, starting from a seated position on the floor and using only the hands and arms. Kicking the legs in a kind of "tride" was normally permitted. Many gymnasts can do this in the straddle or pike position, which eliminates the help generated from the legs though it can be done with legs as well. Main article: Flying rings Flying rings was an event similar to still rings , but with the performer executing a series of stunts while swinging. It was a gymnastic event sanctioned by both the NCAA and the AAU until the early 1960s. Club swinging[ edit ] Club swinging, a.k.a. Indian clubs, was an event in Men's Artistic Gymnastics sometime up until the 1950s. It was similar to the clubs in both Women's and Men's Rhythmic Gymnastics but much simpler with few throws allowed. It was practice. It was included in the 1904 and 1932 Summer Olympic Games. Other (men's artistic)[ edit ] Team horizontal bar and parallel bar in the 1896 Summer Olympics Team free and Swedish system in the 1912 and 1920 Summer Olympics Combined and triathlon in the 1904 Summer Olympics Side horse vault in 1924 Summer Olympics Tumbling in the 1932 Summer Olympics Other (women's artistic)[ edit ] Team exercise at the 1928, 1936, and 1948 Summer Olympics Parallel bars at the 1938 World Championships Team portable apparatus at the 1952 and 1956 Summer Olympics Health and safety[ edit ] Gymnastics is one of the most dangerous sports, with a very high injury rate seen in girls age 11 to 18. [61] Some gymnastic movements which were allowed in past competitions are now banned for safety reasons.[ clarification needed ] Physical injuries[ edit ] Compared to athletes who play other sports, gymnasts are at higher than average risk of overuse injuries and injuries caused by early sports specialization among children and young adults. [62] [63] Gymnasts are at particular risk of foot and wrist injuries. [64] [65] Strength training can help prevent injuries.
Under 60 kg(130 lb; 9.4 st) 60–66 kg(132–146 lb; 9.4–10.4 st) 66–73 kg(146–161 lb; 10.4–11.5 st) 73–81 kg(161–179 lb; 11.5–12.8 st) 81–90 kg(179–198 lb; 12.8–14.2 st) 90–100 kg(200–220 lb; 14–16 st) Over 100 kg(220 lb; 16 st) Women Under 48 kg(106 lb; 7.6 st) 48–52 kg(106–115 lb; 7.6–8.2 st) 52–57 kg(115–126 lb; 8.2–9.0 st) 57–63 kg(126–139 lb; 9.0–9.9 st) 63–70 kg(139–154 lb; 9.9–11.0 st) 70–78 kg(154–172 lb; 11.0–12.3 st) Over 78 kg(172 lb; 12.3 st) Throw during competition, leads to an ippon Competition scoring[ edit ] A throw that places the opponent on their back with impetus and control scores an ippon (一本), winning the contest. [72] A lesser throw, where the opponent is thrown onto his back, but with insufficient force to merit an ippon, scores a waza-ari (技あり). [72] Two scores of waza-ari equal an ippon waza-ari awasete ippon (技あり合わせて一本,  ). This rule was cancelled in 2017, but it was resumed in 2018. Formerly, a throw that places the opponent onto his side scores a yuko (有効). [72] In 2017, the International Judo Federation announced changes in evaluation of points. There will only be ippon and waza-ari scores given during a match with yuko scores now included within waza-ari. [73] Ippon is scored in ne-waza for pinning an opponent on his back with a recognised osaekomi-waza for 20 seconds or by forcing a submission through shime-waza or kansetsu-waza. [72] A submission is signalled by tapping the mat or the opponent at least twice with the hand or foot, or by saying maitta (まいった, I surrender). [72] A pin lasting for less than 20 seconds, but more than 10 seconds scores waza-ari (formerly waza-ari was awarded for holds of longer than 15 seconds and yuko for holds of longer than 10 seconds). [72] Formerly, there was an additional score that was lesser to yuko, that of Koka (効果). [72] This has since been removed. [74] [75] If the scores are identical at the end of the match, the contest is resolved by the Golden Score rule. Golden Score is a sudden death situation where the clock is reset to match-time, and the first contestant to achieve any score wins. If there is no score during this period, then the winner is decided by Hantei (判定), the majority opinion of the referee and the two corner judges. [76] There have been changes to the scoring. In January 2013, the Hantei was removed and the "Golden Score" no longer has a time limit. The match would continue until a judoka scored through a technique or if the opponent is penalised (Hansoku-make). Penalties[ edit ] Two types of penalties may be awarded. A shido (指導 –  literally "guidance") is awarded for minor rule infringements. A shido can also be awarded for a prolonged period of non-aggression. Recent rule changes allow for the first shidos to result in only warnings. If there is a tie, then and only then, will the number of shidos (if less than three) be used to determine the winner. After three shidos are given, the victory is given to the opponent, constituting an indirect hansoku-make (反則負け –  literally "foul-play defeat"), but does not result in expulsion from the tournament. Note: Prior to 2017, the 4th shido was hansoku-make. If hansoku-make is awarded for a major rule infringement, it results not just in loss of the match, but in the expulsion from the tournament of the penalized player. In mixed martial arts[ edit ] A number of judo practitioners have made an impact in mixed martial arts . [77] [78] [79] Notable judo-trained MMA fighters include Olympic medalists Hidehiko Yoshida (Gold, 1992), Naoya Ogawa (Silver, 1992), Paweł Nastula (Gold, 1996), Makoto Takimoto (Gold, 2000), Satoshi Ishii (Gold, 2008), Ronda Rousey (Bronze, 2008), and Kayla Harrison (Gold, 2012 and 2016), former Russian national judo championship bronze medalist Fedor Emelianenko , Yoshihiro Akiyama , Don Frye , Rick Hawn , Daniel Kelly , Hector Lombard , Karo Parisyan , Ayaka Hamasaki , Antônio Silva , Oleg Taktarov , Rhadi Ferguson , Dong-Sik Yoon , and Khabib Nurmagomedov . [80] [81] Alternative styles and derivative martial arts[ edit ] International judo camp in Artjärvi , Orimattila , Finland Kano Jigoro's Kodokan judo is the most popular and well-known style of judo, but is not the only one. The terms judo and jujutsu were quite interchangeable in the early years, so some of these forms of judo are still known as jujutsu or jiu-jitsu either for that reason, or simply to differentiate them from mainstream judo. From Kano's original style of judo, several related forms have evolved—some now widely considered to be distinct arts: Kosen judo [ edit ] Commonly described as a separate style of Judo, Kosen judo is a competition rules set of Kodokan judo that was popularized in the early 20th century for use in Japanese Special High Schools Championships held at Kyoto Imperial University. [82] The word "Kosen" is an acronym of Koto Senmon Gakko (高等専門学校, literally "Higher Professional School"). Currently, competitions are organized between Japan's seven former Imperial Universities and referred to as Nanatei Judo ( ja:七帝柔道 , literally "Seven Emperors Judo"). Kosen judo's focus on newaza has drawn comparisons with Brazilian jiu-jitsu . Freestyle Judo[ edit ] Freestyle Judo is a form of competitive judo practiced primarily in the United States that retains techniques that have been removed from mainstream IJF rules. [83] Freestyle Judo is currently backed by the International Freestyle Judo Alliance (IFJA). The Amateur Athletic Union (AAU) officially sanctions Freestyle Judo in the United States of America . [84] Georgian Judo[ edit ] Georgian Judo is influenced by Chidaoba (Georgian cultural jacket wrestling). Chidaoba's major influence on the Georgian style of judo is in its unorthodox grips as well as its throws and takedowns. Georgian Judo is also known for its countering techniques through the use of power moves such as bear hugs and double underhooks into throws and takedowns. [85] [86] It is represented by various olympic winners and World Champions, such as Lasha Bekauri , Lukhumi Chkhvimiani , Shota Chochishvili , Tato Grigalashvili , Zaza Kedelashvili , David Khakhaleishvili , Luka Maisuradze , Lasha Shavdatuashvili and others. Russian Judo[ edit ] This distinctive style of judo was influenced by the Soviet martial art of Sambo. It is represented by well-known coaches such as Alexander Retuinskih and Igor Yakimov, and mixed martial arts fighters such as Fedor Emelianenko, Oleg Taktarov, Khabib Nurmagomedov, and Karo Parisyan. In turn, Russian judo has influenced mainstream judo, with techniques such as the flying armbar being accepted into Kodokan judo. [87] [88] Mongolian Judo[ edit ] Unlike other Far East styles of Judo, Mongolian Judo focuses much more on power rather than technique. The influence of Bokh on Mongolian Judo can be seen in its grips and body positioning. Judo grips such as the over under, double underhooks and the heavy use of grips on the belt. [89] [90] It is represented by various world champions, such as Khaliuny Boldbaatar , Tsendiin Damdin , Boldyn Gankhaich , Naidangiin Tüvshinbayar , Mönkhbatyn Urantsetseg , Ganbatyn Boldbaatar . Korean Judo[ edit ] Korean Judo is also very technical but what really separates it from other styles is the speed at which its techniques are performed. Korean Judo it is not powerful in terms of using strength but instead, the practitioners use speed, movement and technique in order to create fast and powerful snaps. This styles produced various olympic champions, like Ahn Byeong-keun, Cho Min-sun, Choi Min-ho, Ha Hyung-joo, Jeon Ki-young, Kim Jae-bum, Kim Jae-Yup, Lee Kyung-Keun, Lee Won-hee, Song Dae-Nam and others. [91] [92] French Judo[ edit ] French Judo is based on tactical Kumi Kata and focuses on breaking the posture of the opponent as well as preventing opponents from attaining a proper grip. This style does not use a huge amount of power, it prefer to use technique, tactics and timing. [93] [94] Many French judo practitioners have become World and Olympic champions, like Clarisse Agbegnenou, Émilie Andéol, Marc Alexandre, Djamel Bouras, Amandine Buchard, Guillaume Chaine, Axel Clerget, Sarah-Léonie Cysique, Lucie Décosse, Romane Dicko, David Douillet, Catherine Fleury-Vachon, Alexandre Iddir and many others. Cuban Judo[ edit ] Cuban Judo is characterized by an explosive and high athletic style that puts an emphasis on body conditioning and calculated planning mixed with raw power. In terms of training the athletes use a particularly methodical and intellectual approach to the sport. [95] [96] Azerbaijani Judo[ edit ] Judo in Azerbaijan has developed over the years and has become deep rooted and considered a top sport in the country. It's very similar to Georgian Judo, as its mostly focused on the practitioner's strength during throws. It's a hybrid of the original Kodokan Judo and the traditional Azerbaijan style of wrestling called Azeri, whose techniques consist of unorthodox grips and positioning during counter-attacks. [97] [98] Israeli Judo[ edit ] Judo has become a top sport in Israel only recently. Israeli Judo is characterized by a particular emphasis on hip throws, which are executed with a mix of technique and aggression, with the practitioner that has to adjust his sleeves before powerfully gripping and throwing the opponent away. [99] [100] Sambo [ edit ] Sambo is influenced by judo combined with wrestling techniques, and striking in case of combat sambo . Vasili Oshchepkov was one of the first European judo black belts under Kano. Oshchepkov went on to contribute his knowledge of judo as one of the three founders of Sambo, which also integrated various international and Soviet bloc wrestling styles and other combative techniques. Oshchepkov was executed during the political purges of 1937 and judo was banned for decades until its inclusion in the 1964 Olympics , where sambists won 4 bronze medals. [101] In their History of Sambo, Brett Jacques and Scott Anderson wrote that in Russia "judo and SOMBO were considered to be the same thing"—albeit with a different uniform and some differences in the rules. [102] Brazilian jiu-jitsu [ edit ] An adoption of Kano jiu jitsu (a common name for judo at the time) in Brazil attributed to Mitsuya Maeda's students, [103] most notably the Gracie family . [104] [105] 10th Planet Jiu Jitsu and other wrestling-influenced systems without the gi have also become popular. [106]
A painting of Minoan youths boxing, from an Akrotiri fresco circa 1650 BC. This is the earliest documented use of boxing gloves . A boxing scene depicted on a Panathenaic amphora from Ancient Greece, circa 336 BC, British Museum Hitting with different extremities of the body, such as kicks and punches , as an act of human aggression , has existed across the world throughout human history , being a combat system as old as wrestling . However, in terms of sports competition , due to the lack of writing in the prehistoric times and the lack of references, it is not possible to determine rules of any kind of boxing in prehistory, and in ancient times only can be inferred from the few intact sources and references to the sport. The origin of the sport of boxing is unknown, [4] however according to some sources boxing has prehistoric origins in present-day Ethiopia , where it appeared in the sixth millennium BC. When the Egyptians invaded Nubia they learned the art of boxing from the local population, and they took the sport to Egypt where it became popular. From Egypt, boxing spread to other countries including Greece , eastward to Mesopotamia, and northward to Rome. [5] The earliest visual evidence of boxing comes from Egypt and Sumer both from the third millennium BC. [6] [7] A relief sculpture from Egyptian Thebes ( c. 1350 BC) shows both boxers and spectators. [7] These early Middle-Eastern and Egyptian depictions showed contests where fighters were either bare-fisted or had a band supporting the wrist. [7] The earliest evidence of use of gloves can be found in Minoan Crete ( c. 1500–1400 BC). [7] Various types of boxing existed in ancient India . The earliest references to musti-yuddha come from classical Vedic epics such as the Rig Veda ( c. 1500–1000 BCE) and Ramayana ( c. 700–400 BCE). [12] The Mahabharata describes two combatants boxing with clenched fists and fighting with kicks, finger strikes, knee strikes and headbutts during the time of King Virata . [13] Duels (niyuddham) were often fought to the death. During the period of the Western Satraps , the ruler Rudradaman —in addition to being well-versed in "the great sciences" which included Indian classical music , Sanskrit grammar , and logic—was said to be an excellent horseman, charioteer, elephant rider, swordsman and boxer. [14] The Gurbilas Shemi, an 18th-century Sikh text, gives numerous references to musti-yuddha. The martial art is related to other forms of martial arts found in other parts of the Indian cultural sphere including Muay Thai in Thailand, Muay Lao in Laos, Pradal Serey in Cambodia and Lethwei in Myanmar. [15] [16] In Ancient Greece boxing was a well developed sport called pygmachia , and enjoyed consistent popularity. In Olympic terms, it was first introduced in the 23rd Olympiad , 688 BC. The boxers would wind leather thongs around their hands in order to protect them. There were no rounds and boxers fought until one of them acknowledged defeat or could not continue. Weight categories were not used, which meant heavier fighters had a tendency to dominate. The style of boxing practiced typically featured an advanced left leg stance, with the left arm semi-extended as a guard, in addition to being used for striking, and with the right arm drawn back ready to strike. It was the head of the opponent which was primarily targeted, and there is little evidence to suggest that targeting the body or the use of kicks was common, [17] [18] in which it resembled modern western boxing. A boxer and a rooster in a Roman mosaic of first century AD at the National Archaeological Museum, Naples Boxing was a popular spectator sport in Ancient Rome . [19] Fighters protected their knuckles with leather strips wrapped around their fists. Eventually harder leather was used and the strips became a weapon. Metal studs were introduced to the strips to make the cestus . Fighting events were held at Roman amphitheatres . Early London prize ring rules A straight right demonstrated in Edmund Price's The Science of Defence: A Treatise on Sparring and Wrestling, 1867 Records of boxing activity disappeared in the west after the fall of the Western Roman Empire when the wearing of weapons became common once again and interest in fighting with the fists waned. However, there are detailed records of various fist-fighting sports that were maintained in different cities and provinces of Italy between the 12th and 17th centuries. There was also a sport in ancient Rus called kulachniy boy or 'fist fighting'. [20] As the wearing of swords became less common, there was renewed interest in fencing with the fists. The sport later resurfaced in England during the early 16th century in the form of bare-knuckle boxing , sometimes referred to as prizefighting. The first documented account of a bare-knuckle fight in England appeared in 1681 in the London Protestant Mercury, and the first English bare-knuckle champion was James Figg in 1719. [21] This is also the time when the word "boxing" first came to be used. This earliest form of modern boxing was very different. Contests in Mr. Figg's time, in addition to fist fighting, also contained fencing and cudgeling. On 6 January 1681, the first recorded boxing match took place in Britain when Christopher Monck , 2nd Duke of Albemarle (and later Lieutenant Governor of Jamaica ), engineered a bout between his butler and his butcher with the latter winning the prize. Early fighting had no written rules. There were no weight divisions or round limits, and no referee. In general, it was extremely chaotic. An early article on boxing was published in Nottingham in 1713, by Sir Thomas Parkyns, 2nd Baronet , a wrestling patron from Bunny, Nottinghamshire , who had practised the techniques he described. The article, a single page in his manual of wrestling and fencing, Progymnasmata: The inn-play, or Cornish-hugg wrestler, described a system of headbutting, punching, eye-gouging, chokes, and hard throws, not recognized in boxing today. [22] The first boxing rules, called the Broughton Rules , were introduced by champion Jack Broughton in 1743 to protect fighters in the ring where deaths sometimes occurred. [23] Under these rules, if a man went down and could not continue after a count of 30 seconds, the fight was over. Hitting a downed fighter and grasping below the waist were prohibited. Broughton encouraged the use of "mufflers", a form of padded bandage or mitten, to be used in "jousting" or sparring sessions in training, and in exhibition matches. Tom Molineaux (left) vs Tom Cribb in a re-match for the heavyweight championship of England, 1811 These rules did allow the fighters an advantage not enjoyed by today's boxers; they permitted the fighter to drop to one knee to end the round and begin the 30-second count at any time. Thus a fighter realizing he was in trouble had an opportunity to recover. However, this was considered "unmanly" [24] and was frequently disallowed by additional rules negotiated by the seconds of the boxers. [25] In modern boxing, there is a three-minute limit to rounds (unlike the downed fighter ends the round rule). Intentionally going down in modern boxing will cause the recovering fighter to lose points in the scoring system. Furthermore, as the contestants did not have heavy leather gloves and wristwraps to protect their hands, they used different punching technique to preserve their hands because the head was a common target to hit full out.[ dubious – discuss ][ citation needed ] Almost all period manuals have powerful straight punches with the whole body behind them to the face (including forehead) as the basic blows. [26] [27] [ unreliable source? ] The British sportswriter Pierce Egan coined the term "the sweet science" as an epithet for prizefighting – or more fully "the sweet science of bruising" as a description of England's bare-knuckle fight scene in the early nineteenth century. [28] Boxing could also be used to settle disputes even by females. In 1790 in Waddington, Lincolnshire Mary Farmery and Susanna Locker both laid claim to the affections of a young man; this produced a challenge from the former to fight for the prize, which was accepted by the latter. Proper sidesmen were chosen, and every matter conducted in form. After several knock-down blows on both sides, the battle ended in favour of Mary Farmery. [29] The London Prize Ring Rules introduced measures that remain in effect for professional boxing to this day, such as outlawing butting, gouging, scratching, kicking, hitting a man while down, holding the ropes, and using resin, stones or hard objects in the hands, and biting. [30] Marquess of Queensberry rules (1867) In 1867, the Marquess of Queensberry rules were drafted by John Chambers for amateur championships held at Lillie Bridge in London for lightweights , middleweights and heavyweights . The rules were published under the patronage of the Marquess of Queensberry , whose name has always been associated with them. The June 1894 Leonard–Cushing bout. Each of the six one-minute rounds recorded by the Kinetograph was made available to exhibitors for $22.50. [31] Customers who watched the final round saw Leonard score a knockdown. There were twelve rules in all, and they specified that fights should be "a fair stand-up boxing match" in a 24-foot-square or similar ring. Rounds were three minutes with one-minute rest intervals between rounds. Each fighter was given a ten-second count if he was knocked down, and wrestling was banned. The introduction of gloves of "fair-size" also changed the nature of the bouts. An average pair of boxing gloves resembles a bloated pair of mittens and are laced up around the wrists. [32] The gloves can be used to block an opponent's blows. As a result of their introduction, bouts became longer and more strategic with greater importance attached to defensive maneuvers such as slipping, bobbing, countering and angling. Because less defensive emphasis was placed on the use of the forearms and more on the gloves, the classical forearms outwards, torso leaning back stance of the bare knuckle boxer was modified to a more modern stance in which the torso is tilted forward and the hands are held closer to the face. Late 19th and early 20th centuries Through the late nineteenth century, the martial art of boxing or prizefighting was primarily a sport of dubious legitimacy. Outlawed in England and much of the United States, prizefights were often held at gambling venues and broken up by police. [33] Brawling and wrestling tactics continued, and riots at prizefights were common occurrences. Still, throughout this period, there arose some notable bare knuckle champions who developed fairly sophisticated fighting tactics. Amateur Boxing Club, Wales , 1963 The English case of R v. Coney in 1882 found that a bare-knuckle fight was an assault occasioning actual bodily harm , despite the consent of the participants. This marked the end of widespread public bare-knuckle contests in England. The first world heavyweight champion under the Queensberry Rules was "Gentleman Jim" Corbett , who defeated John L. Sullivan in 1892 at the Pelican Athletic Club in New Orleans . [34] The first instance of film censorship in the United States occurred in 1897 when several states banned the showing of prize fighting films from the state of Nevada, [35] where it was legal at the time. Throughout the early twentieth century, boxers struggled to achieve legitimacy. [36] They were aided by the influence of promoters like Tex Rickard and the popularity of great champions such as John L. Sullivan. Modern boxing Robert Helenius (on the right) vs. Attila Levin (on the left) at Hartwall Arena in Helsinki , Finland, on 27 November 2010 The modern sport arose from illegal venues and outlawed prizefighting and has become a multibillion-dollar commercial enterprise. A majority of young talent still comes from poverty-stricken areas around the world. [37] Places like Mexico, Africa, South America, and Eastern Europe prove to be filled with young aspiring athletes who wish to become the future of boxing. Even in the U.S., places like the inner cities of New York, and Chicago have given rise to promising young talent. According to Rubin, "boxing lost its appeal with the American middle class, and most of who boxes in modern America come from the streets and are street fighters". [38] Rules Main article: Marquess of Queensberry Rules The Marquess of Queensberry Rules have been the general rules governing modern boxing since their publication in 1867. [39] A boxing match typically consists of a determined number of three-minute rounds, a total of up to 9 to 12 rounds with a minute spent between each round with the fighters resting in their assigned corners and receiving advice and attention from their coach and staff. The fight is controlled by a referee who works within the ring to judge and control the conduct of the fighters, rule on their ability to fight safely, count knocked-down fighters, and rule on fouls. Up to three judges are typically present at ringside to score the bout and assign points to the boxers, based on punches and elbows that connect, defense, knockdowns, hugging and other, more subjective, measures. Because of the open-ended style of boxing judging, many fights have controversial results, in which one or both fighters believe they have been "robbed" or unfairly denied a victory. Each fighter has an assigned corner of the ring, where their coach, as well as one or more "seconds" may administer to the fighter at the beginning of the fight and between rounds. Each boxer enters into the ring from their assigned corners at the beginning of each round and must cease fighting and return to their corner at the signalled end of each round. A bout in which the predetermined number of rounds passes is decided by the judges, and is said to "go the distance". The fighter with the higher score at the end of the fight is ruled the winner. With three judges, unanimous and split decisions are possible, as are draws. A boxer may win the bout before a decision is reached through a knock-out; such bouts are said to have ended "inside the distance". If a fighter is knocked down during the fight, determined by whether the boxer touches the canvas floor of the ring with any part of their body other than the feet as a result of the opponent's punch and not a slip, as determined by the referee, the referee begins counting until the fighter returns to their feet and can continue. Some jurisdictions require the referee to count to eight regardless of if the fighter gets up before. Should the referee count to ten, then the knocked-down boxer is ruled "knocked out" (whether unconscious or not) and the other boxer is ruled the winner by knockout (KO). A "technical knock-out" (TKO) is possible as well, and is ruled by the referee, fight doctor, or a fighter's corner if a fighter is unable to safely continue to fight, based upon injuries or being judged unable to effectively defend themselves. Many jurisdictions and sanctioning agencies also have a "three-knockdown rule", in which three knockdowns in a given round result in a TKO. A TKO is considered a knockout in a fighter's record. A "standing eight" count rule may also be in effect. This gives the referee the right to step in and administer a count of eight to a fighter that the referee feels may be in danger, even if no knockdown has taken place. After counting the referee will observe the fighter, and decide if the fighter is fit to continue. For scoring purposes, a standing eight count is treated as a knockdown. Ingemar Johansson of Sweden KO's heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson , 26 June 1959 In general, boxers are prohibited from hitting below the belt, holding, tripping, pushing, biting, or spitting. The boxer's shorts are raised so the opponent is not allowed to hit to the groin area with intent to cause pain or injury. Failure to abide by the former may result in a foul. They also are prohibited from kicking, head-butting, or hitting with any part of the arm other than the knuckles of a closed fist (including hitting with the elbow, shoulder or forearm, as well as with open gloves, the wrist, the inside, back or side of the hand). They are prohibited as well from hitting the back, back of the head or neck (called a "rabbit-punch") or the kidneys. They are prohibited from holding the ropes for support when punching, holding an opponent while punching, or ducking below the belt of their opponent (dropping below the waist of your opponent, no matter the distance between). If a "clinch" – a defensive move in which a boxer wraps their opponent's arms and holds on to create a pause – is broken by the referee, each fighter must take a full step back before punching again (alternatively, the referee may direct the fighters to "punch out" of the clinch). When a boxer is knocked down, the other boxer must immediately cease fighting and move to the furthest neutral corner of the ring until the referee has either ruled a knockout or called for the fight to continue. Violations of these rules may be ruled "fouls" by the referee, who may issue warnings, deduct points, or disqualify an offending boxer, causing an automatic loss, depending on the seriousness and intentionality of the foul. An intentional foul that causes injury that prevents a fight from continuing usually causes the boxer who committed it to be disqualified. A fighter who suffers an accidental low-blow may be given up to five minutes to recover, after which they may be ruled knocked out if they are unable to continue. Accidental fouls that cause injury ending a bout may lead to a "no contest" result, or else cause the fight to go to a decision if enough rounds (typically four or more, or at least three in a four-round fight) have passed. Unheard of in the modern era, but common during the early 20th Century in North America, a "newspaper decision (NWS)" might be made after a no decision bout had ended. A "no decision" bout occurred when, by law or by pre-arrangement of the fighters, if both boxers were still standing at the fight's conclusion and there was no knockout, no official decision was rendered and neither boxer was declared the winner. But this did not prevent the pool of ringside newspaper reporters from declaring a consensus result among themselves and printing a newspaper decision in their publications. Officially, however, a "no decision" bout resulted in neither boxer winning or losing. Boxing historians sometimes use these unofficial newspaper decisions in compiling fight records for illustrative purposes only. Often, media outlets covering a match will personally score the match, and post their scores as an independent sentence in their report. Professional vs. amateur boxing Women's Amateur Boxing Throughout the 17th to 19th centuries, boxing bouts were motivated by money, as the fighters competed for prize money, promoters controlled the gate, and spectators bet on the result. The modern Olympic movement revived interest in amateur sports, and amateur boxing became an Olympic sport in 1908. In their current form, Olympic and other amateur bouts are typically limited to three or four rounds, scoring is computed by points based on the number of clean blows landed, regardless of impact, and fighters wear protective headgear, reducing the number of injuries, knockdowns, and knockouts. [40] Currently scoring blows in amateur boxing are subjectively counted by ringside judges, but the Australian Institute for Sport has demonstrated a prototype of an Automated Boxing Scoring System , which introduces scoring objectivity, improves safety, and arguably makes the sport more interesting to spectators. Professional boxing remains by far the most popular form of the sport globally, though amateur boxing is dominant in Cuba and some former Soviet republics. For most fighters, an amateur career, especially at the Olympics, serves to develop skills and gain experience in preparation for a professional career. Western boxers typically participate in one Olympics and then turn pro, while Cubans and boxers from other socialist countries have an opportunity to collect multiple medals. [41] In 2016, professional boxers were admitted in the Olympic Games and other tournaments sanctioned by AIBA . [42] This was done in part to level the playing field and give all of the athletes the same opportunities government-sponsored boxers from socialist countries and post-Soviet republics have. [43] However, professional organizations strongly opposed that decision. [44] [45] Amateur boxing Main article: Amateur boxing Nicola Adams (left) is the first female boxer to win an Olympic gold medal. Here with Mary Kom of India. Amateur boxing may be found at the collegiate level, at the Olympic Games, Commonwealth Games , Asian Games , etc. In many other venues sanctioned by amateur boxing associations. Amateur boxing has a point scoring system that measures the number of clean blows landed rather than physical damage. Bouts consist of three rounds of three minutes in the Olympic and Commonwealth Games, and three rounds of three minutes in a national ABA (Amateur Boxing Association) bout, each with a one-minute interval between rounds. Competitors wear protective headgear and gloves with a white strip or circle across the knuckle. There are cases however, where white ended gloves are not required but any solid color may be worn. The white end is just a way to make it easier for judges to score clean hits. Each competitor must have their hands properly wrapped, pre-fight, for added protection on their hands and for added cushion under the gloves. Gloves worn by the fighters must be twelve ounces in weight unless the fighters weigh under 165 pounds (75 kg), thus allowing them to wear ten ounce gloves. A punch is considered a scoring punch only when the boxers connect with the white portion of the gloves. Each punch that lands cleanly on the head or torso with sufficient force is awarded a point. A referee monitors the fight to ensure that competitors use only legal blows. A belt worn over the torso represents the lower limit of punches – any boxer repeatedly landing low blows below the belt is disqualified. Referees also ensure that the boxers don't use holding tactics to prevent the opponent from swinging. If this occurs, the referee separates the opponents and orders them to continue boxing. Repeated holding can result in a boxer being penalized or ultimately disqualified. Referees will stop the bout if a boxer is seriously injured, if one boxer is significantly dominating the other or if the score is severely imbalanced. [46] Amateur bouts which end this way may be noted as "RSC" (referee stopped contest) with notations for an outclassed opponent (RSCO), outscored opponent (RSCOS), injury (RSCI) or head injury (RSCH). Professional boxing Firpo sending Dempsey outside the ring; painting by George Bellows Professional bouts are usually much longer than amateur bouts, typically ranging from ten to twelve rounds, though four-round fights are common for less experienced fighters or club fighters. There are also some two- and three-round professional bouts, especially in Australia. Through the early 20th century, it was common for fights to have unlimited rounds, ending only when one fighter quit, benefiting high-energy fighters like Jack Dempsey . Fifteen rounds remained the internationally recognized limit for championship fights for most of the 20th century until the early 1980s , when the death of boxer Kim Duk-koo eventually prompted the World Boxing Council and other organizations sanctioning professional boxing to reduce the limit to twelve rounds. Headgear is not permitted in professional bouts, and boxers are generally allowed to take much more damage before a fight is halted. At any time, the referee may stop the contest if he believes that one participant cannot defend himself due to injury. In that case, the other participant is awarded a technical knockout win. A technical knockout would also be awarded if a fighter lands a punch that opens a cut on the opponent, and the opponent is later deemed not fit to continue by a doctor because of the cut. For this reason, fighters often employ cutmen , whose job is to treat cuts between rounds so that the boxer is able to continue despite the cut. If a boxer simply quits fighting, or if his corner stops the fight, then the winning boxer is also awarded a technical knockout victory. In contrast with amateur boxing, professional male boxers have to be bare-chested. [47] Boxing styles Definition of style "Style" is often defined as the strategic approach a fighter takes during a bout. No two fighters' styles are alike, as each is determined by that individual's physical and mental attributes. Three main styles exist in boxing: outside fighter ("boxer"), brawler (or "slugger"), and inside fighter ("swarmer"). These styles may be divided into several special subgroups, such as counter puncher, etc. The main philosophy of the styles is, that each style has an advantage over one, but disadvantage over the other one. It follows the rock paper scissors scenario – boxer beats brawler, brawler beats swarmer, and swarmer beats boxer. [48] Boxer/out-fighter Heavyweight champion Muhammad Ali was a typical example of an out-fighter. A classic "boxer" or stylist (also known as an "out-fighter") seeks to maintain distance between himself and his opponent, fighting with faster, longer range punches, most notably the jab, and gradually wearing his opponent down. Due to this reliance on weaker punches, out-fighters tend to win by point decisions rather than by knockout, though some out-fighters have notable knockout records. They are often regarded as the best boxing strategists due to their ability to control the pace of the fight and lead their opponent, methodically wearing him down and exhibiting more skill and finesse than a brawler. [49] Out-fighters need reach, hand speed, reflexes, and footwork. Notable out-fighters include Muhammad Ali , Larry Holmes , Joe Calzaghe , Wilfredo Gómez , Salvador Sánchez , Cecilia Brækhus , Gene Tunney , [50] Ezzard Charles , [51] Willie Pep , [52] Meldrick Taylor , Ricardo "Finito" López , Floyd Mayweather Jr. , Roy Jones Jr. , Sugar Ray Leonard , Miguel Vázquez , Sergio "Maravilla" Martínez , Wladimir Klitschko and Guillermo Rigondeaux . This style was also used by fictional boxer Apollo Creed . Boxer-puncher A boxer-puncher is a well-rounded boxer who is able to fight at close range with a combination of technique and power, often with the ability to knock opponents out with a combination and in some instances a single shot. Their movement and tactics are similar to that of an out-fighter (although they are generally not as mobile as an out-fighter), [53] but instead of winning by decision, they tend to wear their opponents down using combinations and then move in to score the knockout. A boxer must be well rounded to be effective using this style. Notable boxer-punchers include Muhammad Ali, Canelo Álvarez , Sugar Ray Leonard, Roy Jones Jr., Wladimir Klitschko, Vasyl Lomachenko , Lennox Lewis , Joe Louis , [54] Wilfredo Gómez, Oscar De La Hoya , Archie Moore , Miguel Cotto , Nonito Donaire , Sam Langford , [55] Henry Armstrong , [56] Sugar Ray Robinson , [57] Tony Zale , Carlos Monzón , [58] Alexis Argüello , Érik Morales , Terry Norris , Marco Antonio Barrera , Naseem Hamed , Thomas Hearns , Julian Jackson and Gennady Golovkin . Counter puncher Counter punchers are slippery, defensive style fighters who often rely on their opponent's mistakes in order to gain the advantage, whether it be on the score cards or more preferably a knockout. They use their well-rounded defense to avoid or block shots and then immediately catch the opponent off guard with a well placed and timed punch. A fight with a skilled counter-puncher can turn into a war of attrition, where each shot landed is a battle in itself. Thus, fighting against counter punchers requires constant feinting and the ability to avoid telegraphing one's attacks. To be truly successful using this style they must have good reflexes, a high level of prediction and awareness, pinpoint accuracy and speed, both in striking and in footwork. Notable counter punchers include Muhammad Ali, Joe Calzaghe, Vitali Klitschko , Evander Holyfield , Max Schmeling , Chris Byrd , Jim Corbett , Jack Johnson , Bernard Hopkins , Laszlo Papp , Jerry Quarry , Anselmo Moreno , James Toney , Marvin Hagler , Juan Manuel Márquez , Humberto Soto , Floyd Mayweather Jr. , Roger Mayweather , Pernell Whitaker , Sergio Martínez and Guillermo Rigondeaux. This style of boxing is also used by fictional boxer Little Mac . Counter punchers usually wear their opponents down by causing them to miss their punches. The more the opponent misses, the faster they tire, and the psychological effects of being unable to land a hit will start to sink in. The counter puncher often tries to outplay their opponent entirely, not just in a physical sense, but also in a mental and emotional sense. This style can be incredibly difficult, especially against seasoned fighters, but winning a fight without getting hit is often worth the pay-off. They usually try to stay away from the center of the ring, in order to outmaneuver and chip away at their opponents. A large advantage in counter-hitting is the forward momentum of the attacker, which drives them further into your return strike. As such, knockouts are more common than one would expect from a defensive style. Brawler/slugger Famous brawler George Foreman A brawler is a fighter who generally lacks finesse and footwork in the ring, but makes up for it through sheer punching power. Many brawlers tend to lack mobility, preferring a less mobile, more stable platform and have difficulty pursuing fighters who are fast on their feet. They may also have a tendency to ignore combination punching in favor of continuous beat-downs with one hand and by throwing slower, more powerful single punches (such as hooks and uppercuts). Their slowness and predictable punching pattern (single punches with obvious leads) often leaves them open to counter punches, so successful brawlers must be able to absorb a substantial amount of punishment. However, not all brawler/slugger fighters are not mobile; some can move around and switch styles if needed but still have the brawler/slugger style such as Wilfredo Gómez, Prince Naseem Hamed and Danny García . A brawler's most important assets are power and chin (the ability to absorb punishment while remaining able to continue boxing). Examples of this style include George Foreman , Rocky Marciano , Julio César Chávez , Jack Dempsey , Riddick Bowe , Danny García, Wilfredo Gómez, Sonny Liston , John L. Sullivan, Max Baer , Prince Naseem Hamed, Ray Mancini , David Tua , Arturo Gatti , Micky Ward , Brandon Ríos , Ruslan Provodnikov , Michael Katsidis , James Kirkland , Marcos Maidana , Vitali Klitschko, Jake LaMotta , Manny Pacquiao , and Ireland's John Duddy . This style of boxing was also used by fictional boxers Rocky Balboa and James "Clubber" Lang . Brawlers tend to be more predictable and easy to hit but usually fare well enough against other fighting styles because they train to take punches very well. They often have a higher chance than other fighting styles to score a knockout against their opponents because they focus on landing big, powerful hits, instead of smaller, faster attacks. Oftentimes they place focus on training on their upper body instead of their entire body, to increase power and endurance. They also aim to intimidate their opponents because of their power, stature and ability to take a punch. Swarmer/in-fighter Henry Armstrong was known for his aggressive, non-stop assault style of fighting. In-fighters/swarmers (sometimes called "pressure fighters") attempt to stay close to an opponent, throwing intense flurries and combinations of hooks and uppercuts. Mainly Mexican, Irish, Irish-American, Puerto Rican, and Mexican-American boxers popularized this style. A successful in-fighter often needs a good " chin " because swarming usually involves being hit with many jabs before they can maneuver inside where they are more effective. In-fighters operate best at close range because they are generally shorter and have less reach than their opponents and thus are more effective at a short distance where the longer arms of their opponents make punching awkward. However, several fighters tall for their division have been relatively adept at in-fighting as well as out-fighting. The essence of a swarmer is non-stop aggression. Many short in-fighters use their stature to their advantage, employing a bob-and-weave defense by bending at the waist to slip underneath or to the sides of incoming punches. Unlike blocking, causing an opponent to miss a punch disrupts his balance, this permits forward movement past the opponent's extended arm and keeps the hands free to counter. A distinct advantage that in-fighters have is when throwing uppercuts, they can channel their entire bodyweight behind the punch; Mike Tyson was famous for throwing devastating uppercuts. Marvin Hagler was known for his hard "chin", punching power, body attack and the stalking of his opponents. Some in-fighters, like Mike Tyson, have been known for being notoriously hard to hit. The key to a swarmer is aggression, endurance, chin, and bobbing-and-weaving. Notable in-fighters include Henry Armstrong , Aaron Pryor , Julio César Chávez, Jack Dempsey, Shawn Porter , Miguel Cotto, Gennady Golovkin , Joe Frazier , Danny García, Mike Tyson , Manny Pacquiao, Rocky Marciano , [59] Wayne McCullough , James Braddock , Gerry Penalosa , Harry Greb , [60] [61] David Tua , James Toney and Ricky Hatton . This style was also used by the Street Fighter character Balrog .[ citation needed ] Combinations of styles All fighters have primary skills with which they feel most comfortable, but truly elite fighters are often able to incorporate auxiliary styles when presented with a particular challenge. For example, an out-fighter will sometimes plant his feet and counter punch, or a slugger may have the stamina to pressure fight with his power punches. Old history of the development of boxing and its prevalence contribute to fusion of various types of martial arts and the emergence of new ones that are based on them. For example, a combination of boxing and sportive sambo techniques gave rise to a combat sambo. Style matchups Louis vs. Schmeling , 1936 There is a generally accepted rule of thumb about the success each of these boxing styles has against the others. In general, an in-fighter has an advantage over an out-fighter, an out-fighter has an advantage over a brawler, and a brawler has an advantage over an in-fighter; these form a cycle with each style being stronger relative to one, and weaker relative to another, with none dominating, as in rock paper scissors. Naturally, many other factors, such as the skill level and training of the combatants, determine the outcome of a fight, but the widely held belief in this relationship among the styles is embodied in the cliché amongst boxing fans and writers that "styles make fights". Brawlers tend to overcome swarmers or in-fighters because, in trying to get close to the slugger, the in-fighter will invariably have to walk straight into the guns of the much harder-hitting brawler, so, unless the former has a very good chin and the latter's stamina is poor, the brawler's superior power will carry the day. A famous example of this type of match-up advantage would be George Foreman's knockout victory over Joe Frazier in their original bout "The Sunshine Showdown". Although in-fighters struggle against heavy sluggers, they typically enjoy more success against out-fighters or boxers. Out-fighters prefer a slower fight, with some distance between themselves and the opponent. The in-fighter tries to close that gap and unleash furious flurries. On the inside, the out-fighter loses a lot of his combat effectiveness, because he cannot throw the hard punches. The in-fighter is generally successful in this case, due to his intensity in advancing on his opponent and his good agility, which makes him difficult to evade. For example, the swarming Joe Frazier, though easily dominated by the slugger George Foreman, was able to create many more problems for the boxer Muhammad Ali in their three fights. Joe Louis, after retirement, admitted that he hated being crowded, and that swarmers like untied/undefeated champ Rocky Marciano would have caused him style problems even in his prime. The boxer or out-fighter tends to be most successful against a brawler, whose slow speed (both hand and foot) and poor technique makes him an easy target to hit for the faster out-fighter. The out-fighter's main concern is to stay alert, as the brawler only needs to land one good punch to finish the fight. If the out-fighter can avoid those power punches, he can often wear the brawler down with fast jabs, tiring him out. If he is successful enough, he may even apply extra pressure in the later rounds in an attempt to achieve a knockout. Most classic boxers, such as Muhammad Ali, enjoyed their best successes against sluggers. An example of a style matchup was the historical fight of Julio César Chávez, a swarmer or in-fighter, against Meldrick Taylor , the boxer or out-fighter (see Julio César Chávez vs. Meldrick Taylor ). The match was nicknamed "Thunder Meets Lightning" as an allusion to punching power of Chávez and blinding speed of Taylor. Chávez was the epitome of the "Mexican" style of boxing. Taylor's hand and foot speed and boxing abilities gave him the early advantage, allowing him to begin building a large lead on points. Chávez remained relentless in his pursuit of Taylor and due to his greater punching power Chávez slowly punished Taylor. Coming into the later rounds, Taylor was bleeding from the mouth, his entire face was swollen, the bones around his eye socket had been broken, he had swallowed a considerable amount of his own blood, and as he grew tired, Taylor was increasingly forced into exchanging blows with Chávez, which only gave Chávez a greater chance to cause damage. While there was little doubt that Taylor had solidly won the first three quarters of the fight, the question at hand was whether he would survive the final quarter. Going into the final round, Taylor held a secure lead on the scorecards of two of the three judges. Chávez would have to knock Taylor out to claim a victory, whereas Taylor merely needed to stay away from the Mexican legend. However, Taylor did not stay away, but continued to trade blows with Chávez. As he did so, Taylor showed signs of extreme exhaustion, and every tick of the clock brought Taylor closer to victory unless Chávez could knock him out. With about a minute left in the round, Chávez hit Taylor squarely with several hard punches and stayed on the attack, continuing to hit Taylor with well-placed shots. Finally, with about 25 seconds to go, Chávez landed a hard right hand that caused Taylor to stagger forward towards a corner, forcing Chávez back ahead of him. Suddenly Chávez stepped around Taylor, positioning him so that Taylor was trapped in the corner, with no way to escape from Chávez' desperate final flurry. Chávez then nailed Taylor with a tremendous right hand that dropped the younger man. By using the ring ropes to pull himself up, Taylor managed to return to his feet and was given the mandatory 8-count. Referee Richard Steele asked Taylor twice if he was able to continue fighting, but Taylor failed to answer. Steele then concluded that Taylor was unfit to continue and signaled that he was ending the fight, resulting in a TKO victory for Chávez with only two seconds to go in the bout. Equipment Since boxing involves forceful, repetitive punching, precautions must be taken to prevent damage to bones in the hand . Most trainers do not allow boxers to train and spar without wrist wraps and boxing gloves . Hand wraps are used to secure the bones in the hand, and the gloves are used to protect the hands from blunt injury, allowing boxers to throw punches with more force than if they did not use them. Gloves have been required in competition since the late nineteenth century, though modern boxing gloves are much heavier than those worn by early twentieth-century fighters. Prior to a bout, both boxers agree upon the weight of gloves to be used in the bout, with the understanding that lighter gloves allow heavy punchers to inflict more damage. The brand of gloves can also affect the impact of punches, so this too is usually stipulated before a bout. Both sides are allowed to inspect the wraps and gloves of the opponent to help ensure both are within agreed upon specifications and no tampering has taken place. A mouthguard is important to protect the teeth [62] [63] and gums from injury, and to cushion the jaw, resulting in a decreased chance of knockout. Both fighters must wear soft soled shoes to reduce the damage from accidental (or intentional) stepping on feet. While older boxing boots more commonly resembled those of a professional wrestler, modern boxing shoes and boots tend to be quite similar to their amateur wrestling counterparts. Boxers practice their skills on several types of punching bags. A small, tear-drop-shaped "speed bag" is used to hone reflexes and repetitive punching skills, while a large cylindrical "heavy bag" filled with sand, a synthetic substitute, or water is used to practice power punching and body blows. The double-end bag is usually connected by elastic on the top and bottom and moves randomly upon getting struck and helps the fighter work on accuracy and reflexes. In addition to these distinctive pieces of equipment, boxers also use sport-nonspecific training equipment to build strength, speed, agility, and stamina. Common training equipment includes free weights, rowing machines, jump rope , and medicine balls . Boxers also use punch/focus mitts in which a trainer calls out certain combinations and the fighter strikes the mitts accordingly. This is a great exercise for stamina as the boxer isn't allowed to go at his own pace but that of the trainer, typically forcing the fighter to endure a higher output and volume than usual. In addition, they also allow trainers to make boxers utilize footwork and distances more accurately. Recently boxing clubs have started using something called music boxing machines to train newbies in a more musical way to gain rhythm. Boxing matches typically take place in a boxing ring , a raised platform surrounded by ropes attached to posts rising in each corner. The term "ring" has come to be used as a metaphor for many aspects of prize fighting in general. Technique Main article: Boxing styles and technique Stance The modern boxing stance differs substantially from the typical boxing stances of the 19th and early 20th centuries. The modern stance has a more upright vertical-armed guard, as opposed to the more horizontal, knuckles-facing-forward guard adopted by early 20th century hook users such as Jack Johnson . Upright stance Semi-crouch Full crouch In a fully upright stance, the boxer stands with the legs shoulder-width apart and the rear foot a half-step in front of the lead man. Right-handed or orthodox boxers lead with the left foot and fist (for most penetration power). Both feet are parallel, and the right heel is off the ground. The lead (left) fist is held vertically about six inches in front of the face at eye level. The rear (right) fist is held beside the chin and the elbow tucked against the ribcage to protect the body. The chin is tucked into the chest to avoid punches to the jaw which commonly cause knock-outs and is often kept slightly off-center. Wrists are slightly bent to avoid damage when punching and the elbows are kept tucked in to protect the ribcage. Some boxers fight from a crouch, leaning forward and keeping their feet closer together. The stance described is considered the "textbook" stance and fighters are encouraged to change it around once it's been mastered as a base. Case in point, many fast fighters have their hands down and have almost exaggerated footwork, while brawlers or bully fighters tend to slowly stalk their opponents. In order to retain their stance boxers take 'the first step in any direction with the foot already leading in that direction.' [64] Different stances allow for bodyweight to be differently positioned and emphasised; this may in turn alter how powerfully and explosively a type of punch can be delivered. For instance, a crouched stance allows for the bodyweight to be positioned further forward over the lead left leg. If a lead left hook is thrown from this position, it will produce a powerful springing action in the lead leg and produce a more explosive punch. This springing action could not be generated effectively, for this punch, if an upright stance was used or if the bodyweight was positioned predominantly over the back leg. [65] Mike Tyson was a keen practitioner of a crouched stance and this style of power punching. The preparatory positioning of the bodyweight over the bent lead leg is also known as an isometric preload . Left-handed or southpaw fighters use a mirror image of the orthodox stance, which can create problems for orthodox fighters unaccustomed to receiving jabs, hooks, or crosses from the opposite side. The southpaw stance , conversely, is vulnerable to a straight right hand. North American fighters tend to favor a more balanced stance, facing the opponent almost squarely, while many European fighters stand with their torso turned more to the side. The positioning of the hands may also vary, as some fighters prefer to have both hands raised in front of the face, risking exposure to body shots. Punches There are four basic punches in boxing: the jab , cross , hook and uppercut . Any punch other than a jab is considered a power punch. If a boxer is right-handed (orthodox), their left hand is the lead hand and his right hand is the rear hand. For a left-handed boxer or southpaw, the hand positions are reversed. For clarity, the following assumes a right-handed boxer.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Full-contact combat sport For the fighting styles that combine arts, see Hybrid martial arts . "MMA" redirects here. For other uses, see MMA (disambiguation) . This article may be too long to read and navigate comfortably. Consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings . Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page . (February 2022) Mixed martial arts No, separate male and female events Type Venue Octagonal cage , other type of cage, MMA ring Mixed martial arts (MMA) [a] is a full-contact combat sport based on striking , grappling and ground fighting , incorporating techniques from various combat sports from around the world. [10] The first documented use of the term mixed martial arts was in a review of UFC 1 by television critic Howard Rosenberg in 1993. [11] During the early 20th century, various interstylistic contests took place throughout Japan and in the countries of the East Asia . At the same time, in Brazil , there was a phenomenon called vale tudo , which became known for unrestricted fights between various styles such as judo / Brazilian jiu-jitsu , catch wrestling / luta livre , Muay Thai , and capoeira . Another precursor to modern MMA was the 1976 Ali vs. Inoki exhibition bout (which ended in a draw after 15 rounds), fought between boxer Muhammad Ali and wrestler Antonio Inoki in Japan, where it later inspired the foundation of Shooto in 1985, Pancrase in 1993, and the Pride Fighting Championships in 1997. In the 1990s, the Gracie family brought their Brazilian jiu-jitsu style , first developed in Brazil from the 1920s, to the United States – which culminated in the founding of the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) promotion company in 1993. The company held an event with almost no rules, mostly due to the influence of Art Davie and Rorion Gracie attempting to replicate vale tudo fights that existed in Brazil [12] and would later implement a different set of rules (example: eliminating kicking a grounded opponent), which differed from other leagues which were more in favour of realistic, street like fights. [13] Originally promoted as a competition to find the most effective martial arts for real unarmed combat, competitors from different fighting styles were pitted against one another in contests with relatively few rules. [14] Later, individual fighters incorporated multiple martial arts into their style. MMA promoters were pressured to adopt additional rules to increase competitors' safety, to comply with sport regulations and to broaden mainstream acceptance of the sport. [15] Following these changes, the sport has seen increased popularity with a pay-per-view business that rivals boxing and professional wrestling . [16] A Chinese martial artist preparing to throw his opponent during a lei tai contest in Ancient China . In Ancient China , combat sport appeared in the form of Leitai , a no-holds-barred mixed combat sport that combined Chinese martial arts , boxing and wrestling. [17] The Pancrastinae : A statue portraying the pancratium , an event which took place in the Roman Colosseum . Even as late as the Early Middle Ages , statues were put up in Rome and other cities to honor remarkable pankratiasts. This statue, now part of the Uffizi collection, is a Roman copy of a lost Greek original, circa 3rd century BC. A scene of ancient Greek pankratiasts fighting. Originally found on a Panathenaic amphora, Lamberg Collection. In Ancient Greece , there was a sport called pankration , which featured grappling and striking skills similar to those found in modern MMA. Pankration was formed by combining the already established wrestling and boxing traditions and, in Olympic terms, first featured in the 33rd Olympiad in 648 BC. All strikes and holds were allowed with the exception of biting and gouging, which were banned. The fighters, called pankratiasts, fought until someone could not continue or signaled submission by raising their index finger; there were no rounds. [18] [19] According to the historian E. Norman Gardiner, "No branch of athletics was more popular than the pankration." [20] There is also evidence of similar mixed combat sports in Ancient Egypt , India and Japan . [17] Modern-era precursors[ edit ] The mid-19th century saw the prominence of the new sport savate in the combat sports circle. French savate fighters wanted to test their techniques against the traditional combat styles of its time. In 1852, a contest was held in France between French savateurs and English bare-knuckle boxers in which French fighter Rambaud alias la Resistance fought English fighter Dickinson and won using his kicks. However, the English team still won the four other match-ups during the contest. [21] Contests occurred in the late 19th to mid-20th century between French savateurs and other combat styles. Examples include a 1905 fight between French savateur George Dubois and a judo practitioner Re-nierand which resulted in the latter winning by submission, as well as the highly publicized 1957 fight between French savateur and professional boxer Jacques Cayron and a young Japanese karateka named Mochizuki Hiroo which ended when Cayron knocked Hiroo out with a hook . [21] Catch wrestling appeared in the late 19th century, combining several global styles of wrestling , including Indian pehlwani and English wrestling. [22] [23] In turn, catch wrestling went on to greatly influence modern MMA. [24] No-holds-barred fighting reportedly took place in the late 1880s when wrestlers representing the style of catch wrestling and many others met in tournaments and music-hall challenge matches throughout Europe. In the US, the first major encounter between a boxer and a wrestler in modern times took place in 1887 when John L. Sullivan , then heavyweight world boxing champion, entered the ring with his trainer, wrestling champion William Muldoon , and was slammed to the mat in two minutes. The next publicized encounter occurred in the late 1890s when future heavyweight boxing champion Bob Fitzsimmons took on European wrestling champion Ernest Roeber . In September 1901, Frank "Paddy" Slavin , who had been a contender for Sullivan's boxing title, knocked out future world wrestling champion Frank Gotch in Dawson City , Canada. [25] The judo-practitioner Ren-nierand, who gained fame after defeating George Dubois, would fight again in another similar contest, which he lost to Ukrainian Catch wrestler Ivan Poddubny. [21] Another early example of mixed martial arts was Bartitsu , which Edward William Barton-Wright founded in London in 1899. Combining catch wrestling , judo , boxing , savate , jujutsu and canne de combat (French stick fighting), Bartitsu was the first martial art known to have combined Asian and European fighting styles, [26] and which saw MMA-style contests throughout England, pitting European catch wrestlers and Japanese judoka champions against representatives of various European wrestling styles. [26] Among the precursors of modern MMA are mixed style contests throughout Europe, Japan, and the Pacific Rim during the early 1900s. [27] In Japan, these contests were known as merikan, from the Japanese slang for "American [fighting]". Merikan contests were fought under a variety of rules, including points decision, best of three throws or knockdowns, and victory via knockout or submission. [28] Sambo , a martial art and combat sport developed in Russia in the early 1920s, merged various forms of combat styles such as wrestling, judo and striking into one unique martial art. [29] [30] The popularity of professional wrestling, which was contested under various catch wrestling rules at the time, waned after World War I , when the sport split into two genres: " shoot ", in which the fighters actually competed, and " show ", which evolved into modern professional wrestling . [31] In 1936, heavyweight boxing contender Kingfish Levinsky and professional wrestler Ray Steele competed in a mixed match, which catch wrestler Steele won in 35 seconds. [31] 27 years later, Ray Steele's protégé Lou Thesz fought boxer Jersey Joe Walcott twice in mixed style bouts. The first match was a real contest which Thesz won while the second match was a work, which Thesz also won. In the 1940s in the Palama Settlement in Hawaii, five martial arts masters, under the leadership of Adriano Emperado, curious to determine which martial art was best, began testing each other in their respective arts of kenpo, jujitsu, Chinese and American boxing and tang soo do . From this they developed kajukenbo , the first American mixed martial arts. In 1963, a catch wrestler and judoka Gene Lebell fought professional boxer Milo Savage in a no-holds-barred match. Lebell won by Harai Goshi to rear naked choke, leaving Savage unconscious. This was the first televised bout of mixed-style fighting in North America. The hometown crowd was so enraged that they began to boo and throw chairs at Lebell. [32] On February 12, 1963, three karatekas from Oyama dojo ( kyokushin later) went to the Lumpinee Boxing Stadium in Thailand and fought against three Muay Thai fighters. The three kyokushin karate fighters were Tadashi Nakamura, Kenji Kurosaki and Akio Fujihira (also known as Noboru Osawa), while the Muay Thai team of three authentic Thai fighter. [33] Japan won 2–1: Tadashi Nakamura and Akio Fujihira both knocked out their opponents with punches while Kenji Kurosaki, who fought the Thai, was knocked out by elbows. The Japanese fighter who lost, Kenji Kurosaki, was a kyokushin instructor, rather than a contender, and that he had stood in as a substitute for the absent chosen fighter. In June of the same year, karateka and future kickboxer Tadashi Sawamura faced top Thai fighter Samarn Sor Adisorn: Sawamura was knocked down sixteen times on his way to defeat. [33] Sawamura went on to incorporate what he learned in that fight in kickboxing tournaments. Bruce Lee popularized the concept of mixed martial arts via his hybrid philosophy of Jeet Kune Do during the late 1960s to early 1970s. During the late 1960s to early 1970s, the concept of hybrid martial arts was popularized in the West by Bruce Lee via his system of Jeet Kune Do . [34] Lee believed that "the best fighter is not a boxer, karate or judo man. The best fighter is someone who can adapt to any style, to be formless, to adopt an individual's own style and not following the system of styles." [35] In 2004, UFC President Dana White would call Lee the "father of mixed martial arts" stating: "If you look at the way Bruce Lee trained, the way he fought, and many of the things he wrote, he said the perfect style was no style. You take a little something from everything. You take the good things from every different discipline, use what works, and you throw the rest away". [36] A contemporary of Bruce Lee, Wing Chun practitioner Wong Shun Leung , gained prominence fighting in 60–100 illegal beimo fights against other Chinese martial artists of various styles. Wong also fought and won against Western fighters of other combat styles, such as his match against Russian boxer Giko, [37] his televised fight against a fencer , [38] and his fight against Taiwanese kung fu master Wu Ming Jeet. [39] Wong combined boxing and kickboxing into his kung fu, as Bruce Lee did. Muhammad Ali vs. Antonio Inoki , a 1976 bout in Japan where boxer Muhammad Ali fought wrestler Antonio Inoki , was an important precursor to MMA contests. Muhammad Ali vs. Antonio Inoki took place in Japan in 1976. The classic match-up between professional boxer and professional wrestler turned sour as each fighter refused to engage in the other's style, and after a 15-round stalemate it was declared a draw. Muhammad Ali sustained a substantial amount of damage to his legs, as Antonio Inoki slide-kicked him continuously for the duration of the bout, causing him to be hospitalized for the next three days. [40] The fight played an important role in the history of mixed martial arts. [41] The basis of modern mixed martial arts in Japan can be found across several shoot-style professional wrestling promotions like UWF International and Pro Wrestling Fujiwara Gumi , both founded in 1991, that attempted to create a combat -based style which blended wrestling , kickboxing and submission grappling . Another promotion formed around the same time by Akira Maeda called Fighting Network RINGS initially started as a shoot-style professional wrestling promotion but it also promoted early mixed martial arts contests. From 1995 onwards it began identifying itself as a mixed martial arts promotion and moved away from the original shoot style. Professional wrestlers Masakatsu Funaki and Minoru Suzuki founded Pancrase in 1993 which promoted legitimate contests initially under professional wrestling rules. These promotions inspired Pride Fighting Championships which started in 1997. Pride was acquired by its rival Ultimate Fighting Championship in 2007. [42] [43] A fight between Golden Gloves boxing champion Joey Hadley and Arkansas Karate Champion David Valovich happened on June 22, 1976, at Memphis Blues Baseball Park. The bout had mixed rules: the karateka was allowed to use his fists, feet and knees, while the boxer could only use his fists. Hadley won the fight via knockout on the first round. [44] In 1988 Rick Roufus challenged Changpuek Kiatsongrit to a non-title Muay Thai vs. kickboxing super fight. Roufus was at the time an undefeated Kickboxer and held both the KICK Super Middleweight World title and the PKC Middleweight U.S. title. Kiatsongrit was finding it increasingly difficult to get fights in Thailand as his weight (70 kg) was not typical for Thailand, where competitive bouts tended to be at the lower weights. Roufus knocked Changpuek down twice with punches in the first round, breaking Changpuek's jaw, but lost by technical knockout in the fourth round due to the culmination of low kicks to the legs that he was unprepared for. This match was the first popular fight which showcased the power of such low kicks to a predominantly Western audience. [45] Timeline of major events[ edit ] 2,000+ years ago – Early vale tudo competitions and Gracie Challenge matches 1950s–1960s – Gene Lebell vs. Milo Savage 1960s–1970s – Antonio Inoki and Ishu Kakutōgi Sen 1976 – First MMA promotion in America forms – CV Productions, Inc. 's Tough Guy Contest 1983 – First bill introduced to outlaw MMA in America – The Tough Guy Law 1985 – First amateur MMA league in Japan launches – Shooto 1989 – First professional Shooto event held 1991 – The L-1 Tournament, the first all-women's MMA event, was held by LLPW Mid/Late 1990s – International Sport Combat Federation founded as the first sanctioning body of MMA 2000 – US Army begins sanctioning MMA 2006 – UFC 66 generates over a million PPV buys 2007 – EliteXC: Primetime gains 6.5 million peak viewers on CBS 2009 – Strikeforce holds the first major MMA card with a female main event 2011 – Velasquez vs. Dos Santos gains 8.8 million peak viewers on Fox 2012 – International Mixed Martial Arts Federation was founded with support from UFC 2013 – UFC 157: Rousey vs. Carmouche is headlined by the first women's bout in UFC history 2016 – WME-IMG buys UFC for US$4 billion 2017 – WME-IMG changed its holding name to Endeavor 2021 – Endeavor listed its shares on the New York Stock Exchange under symbol EDR 2023 Modern sport[ edit ] Vale tudo match between thai boxer Flávio Molina and Brazilian jiu-jitsu practitioner Marcelo Behring, 1984 The movement that led to the creation of present-day mixed martial arts scenes emerged from a confluence of several earlier martial arts scenes: the vale tudo events in Brazil, rooftop fights in Hong Kong's street fighting culture, and professional wrestlers , especially in Japan . Vale tudo began in the 1920s and became renowned through its association with the " Gracie challenge ", which was issued by Carlos Gracie and Hélio Gracie and upheld later by descendants of the Gracie family . The "Gracie Challenges" were held in the garages and gyms of the Gracie family members. When the popularity grew, these types of mixed bouts were a staple attraction at the carnivals in Brazil. [46] In the mid-20th century, mixed martial arts contests emerged in Hong Kong's street fighting culture in the form of rooftop fights. During the early 20th century, there was an influx of migrants from mainland China, including Chinese martial arts teachers who opened up martial arts schools in Hong Kong. In the mid-20th century, soaring crime in Hong Kong , combined with limited Hong Kong Police manpower, led to many young Hongkongers learning martial arts for self-defence . Around the 1960s, there were about 400 martial arts schools in Hong Kong, teaching their own distinctive styles of martial arts. In Hong Kong's street fighting culture, there emerged a rooftop fight scene in the 1950s and 1960s, where gangs from rival martial arts schools challenged each other to bare-knuckle fights on Hong Kong's rooftops, in order to avoid crackdowns by colonial British Hong Kong authorities. The most famous fighter to emerge from Hong Kong's rooftop fight scene was Bruce Lee , who combined different techniques from different martial arts schools into his own hybrid martial arts system called Jeet Kune Do . Lee went on to popularize the concept of mixed martial arts internationally. [47] Yuki Nakai fights UFC 1 finalist Gerard Gordeau at Vale Tudo Japan 1995 Early mixed-match martial arts professional wrestling bouts in Japan (known as Ishu Kakutōgi Sen (異種格闘技戦), literally "heterogeneous combat sports bouts") became popular with Antonio Inoki only in the 1970s. Inoki was a disciple of Rikidōzan , but also of Karl Gotch , who trained numerous Japanese wrestlers in catch wrestling . Regulated mixed martial arts competitions were first introduced in the United States by CV Productions, Inc. Its first competition, called Tough Guy Contest was held on March 20, 1980, New Kensington, Pennsylvania , Holiday Inn . During that year the company renamed the brand to Super Fighters and sanctioned ten regulated tournaments in Pennsylvania . In 1983, Pennsylvania State Senate passed a bill known as the " Tough Guy Law " that specifically called for: "Prohibiting Tough Guy contests or Battle of the Brawlers contests", and ended the sport. [48] [49] [50] Japan had its own form of mixed martial arts discipline, Shooto , which evolved from shoot wrestling in 1985, as well as the shoot wrestling derivative Pancrase , which was founded as a promotion in 1993. Pancrase 1 was held in Japan in September 1993, two months before UFC 1 was held in the United States in November 1993. In 1993, the sport was reintroduced to the United States by the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC). [51] UFC promoters initially pitched the event as a real-life fighting video game tournament similar to Street Fighter and Mortal Kombat . [52] The sport gained international exposure and widespread publicity when jiu-jitsu fighter Royce Gracie won the first Ultimate Fighting Championship tournament, submitting three challengers in a total of just five minutes. [53] sparking a revolution in martial arts. [54] [55] The first Vale Tudo Japan tournaments were held in 1994 and 1995 and were both won by Rickson Gracie . Around the same time, International Vale Tudo competition started to develop through (World Vale Tudo Championship (WVC), VTJ , IVC , UVF etc.). Interest in mixed martial arts as a sport resulted in the creation of the Pride Fighting Championships (Pride) in 1997. [56] The sport reached a new peak of popularity in North America in December 2006: a rematch between then UFC light heavyweight champion Chuck Liddell and former champion Tito Ortiz , rivaled the PPV sales of some of the biggest boxing events of all time, [57] and helped the UFC's 2006 PPV gross surpass that of any promotion in PPV history. In 2007, Zuffa LLC , the owners of the UFC MMA promotion, bought Japanese rival MMA brand Pride FC , merging the contracted fighters under one promotion. [58] Comparisons were drawn to the consolidation that occurred in other sports, such as the AFL-NFL Merger in American football . [59] Origin of the term MMA[ edit ] The first documented use of the name mixed martial arts was in a review of UFC 1 by television critic, Howard Rosenberg , in 1993. [11] [60] The term gained popularity when the website, newfullcontact.com (one of the biggest websites covering the sport at the time), hosted and reprinted the article. The first use of the term by a promotion was in September 1995 by Rick Blume, president and CEO of Battlecade Extreme Fighting, just after UFC 7. [61] UFC official, Jeff Blatnick , was responsible for the Ultimate Fighting Championship officially adopting the name mixed martial arts. It was previously marketed as "Ultimate Fighting" and "No Holds Barred (NHB)", until Blatnick and John McCarthy proposed the name "MMA" at the UFC 17 rules meeting in response to increased public criticism. [62] The question as to who actually coined the name is still in debate. [63] Regulation[ edit ] A " soccer kick ", movement where the fighter kicks the head of a downed opponent. While common in vale tudo , early MMA and Japanese promotions, the soccer kick has been banned from the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts The first state-regulated MMA event was held in Biloxi, Mississippi on August 23, 1996, with the sanctioning of IFC's Mayhem in Mississippi [64] show by the Mississippi Athletic Commission under William Lyons. The rules used were an adaptation of the kickboxing rules already accepted by most state athletic commissions. These modified kickboxing rules allowed for take downs and ground fighting and did away with rounds, although they did allow for fighters to be stood up by the referee and restarted if there was no action on the ground. These rules were the first in modern MMA to define fouls, fighting surfaces and the use of the cage. In March 1997, the Iowa Athletic Commission officially sanctioned Battlecade Extreme Fighting under a modified form of its existing rules for Shootfighting . These rules created the three 'five-minute round/one-minute break' format, and mandated shootfighting gloves, as well as weight classes for the first time. Illegal blows were listed as groin strikes, head butting, biting, eye gouging, hair pulling, striking an opponent with an elbow while the opponent is on the mat, kidney strikes, and striking the back of the head with closed fist. Holding onto the ring or cage for any reason was defined as a foul. [65] [66] While there are minor differences between these and the final Unified Rules, notably regarding elbow strikes, the Iowa rules allowed mixed martial arts promoters to conduct essentially modern events legally, anywhere in the state. On March 28, 1997, Extreme Fighting 4 was held under these rules, making it the first show conducted under a version of the modern rules.[ citation needed ] In April 2000, the California State Athletic Commission voted unanimously in favor of regulations that later became the foundation for the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts . However, when the legislation was sent to the California capital in Sacramento for review, it was determined that the sport fell outside the jurisdiction of the CSAC, rendering the vote meaningless. [67] On September 30, 2000, the New Jersey State Athletic Control Board (NJSACB) began allowing mixed martial arts promoters to conduct events in New Jersey. The first event was an IFC event titled Battleground 2000 held in Atlantic City. The intent was to allow the NJSACB to observe actual events and gather information to establish a comprehensive set of rules to regulate the sport effectively. [68] On April 3, 2001, the NJSACB held a meeting to discuss the regulation of mixed martial arts events. This meeting attempted to unify the myriad rules and regulations which had been utilized by the different mixed martial arts organizations. At this meeting, the proposed uniform rules were agreed upon by the NJSACB, several other regulatory bodies, numerous promoters of mixed martial arts events and other interested parties in attendance. At the conclusion of the meeting, all parties in attendance were able to agree upon a uniform set of rules to govern the sport of mixed martial arts. [68] The rules adopted by the NJSACB have become the de facto standard set of rules for professional mixed martial arts across North America. On July 30, 2009, a motion was made at the annual meeting of the Association of Boxing Commissions to adopt these rules as the "Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts". The motion passed unanimously. [69] In November 2005, the United States Army began to sanction mixed martial arts with the first annual Army Combatives Championships held by the US Army Combatives School . [70] Canada formally decriminalized mixed martial arts with a vote on Bill S-209 on June 5, 2013. The bill allows for provinces to have the power to create athletic commissions to regulate and sanction professional mixed martial arts bouts. [71] Promotions[ edit ] According to MMA portal Tapology.com listings, hundreds of MMA promotions around the world produce MMA events. [72] Since the UFC came to prominence in mainstream media in 2006, and with their 2007 merger with Pride FC and purchases of WEC and Strikeforce , no companies have presented significant competition, [73] and the UFC is regarded as having most of the top ranked talent. [74] Fighters usually get contracts in the UFC after competing successfully in other MMA promotions from around the world. Some MMA promotions tend to exist more to build up prospects while others have a mix of prospects and veterans. [75] Some exist only to be feeder leagues to the bigger promotions (e.g. LFA, CWFC), [76] others exist to try to be the best in the world (e.g. ACB, ONE Championship). [77] Some promotions only do four shows a year while others are doing them monthly. According to ScorecardMMA.com, one of the world's top statistical rankings services for MMA, [78] and the only one currently ranking MMA promotions worldwide statistically; "To rank MMA Promotions we use an index that we calculate weekly- Promotion Score.Promo Score calculation is based on the strength of Events and Fighters that Promotion has at that time. Promo Score has three main components: Event Index: based on the quality of events in the last quarter and in the last year. Owned Fighter Index: calculated based on the quality of fighters that the promotion currently owns (contracted, or used recently). Utilized Fighters Index: fighters that the promotion has used in the last four months and in the last three quarters. As of May 26, 2018, the top 15 MMA promotions (out of 41 ranked) in the world are: [79] Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) . Based in Las Vegas, United States. Broadcasts their fights locally on ESPN (prior to 2019 on Fox Sports ) and on other networks around the world. Bellator MMA . Based in Newport Beach, California, United States. Broadcasts their fights locally on the Showtime (prior to 2021 on Paramount Network ) and other networks around the world. Absolute Championship Berkut (ACB). Based in Grozny , Russia. Broadcasts their fights locally on Match TV and streaming on YouTube (with Russian commentary) and Facebook (with English commentary). Fight Nights Global (FNG). Based in Moscow, Russia. Broadcasts their fights locally on Match TV, and streaming on VKontakte . Rizin Fighting Federation (Rizin FF). Based in Tokyo, Japan. Broadcast their fights locally on Fuji Television and for Pay-per-view on SKY PerfecTV! (Japan only) and FITE TV (internationally). Invicta FC (all female MMA). Based in Enka, North Carolina, United States. Broadcasts their fights on UFC Fight Pass . Pancrase . Based in Tokyo, Japan. Broadcast their fights locally on Tokyo MX and streaming on AbemaTV (with Japanese commentary) and on UFC Fight Pass (with English commentary). M-1 Global . Based in St. Petersburg , Russia. Broadcasts their fights locally on Russia-2 and streaming on their mobile app (with English commentary). Legacy Fighting Alliance (LFA). Based in Houston, Texas, US. Broadcasts their fights locally on AXS TV Fights . World Fighting Championship Akhmat (WFCA). Based in Grozny, Russia. Broadcasts their fights locally on Grozny TV (also streaming on Grozny.tv). Konfrontacja Sztuk Walki (KSW). Based in Warsaw, Poland. Broadcasts their fights locally on Polsat Sport and on Fight Network internationally. Deep . Based in Nagoya , Japan. Broadcast their fights locally on SKY PerfecTV! (Fighting TV Samurai channel) and streaming on AbemaTV. Road Fighting Championship (Road FC). Based in Wonju , South Korea. Broadcasts their fights locally on MBC Sports+ and streaming on afreecaTV (with Korean commentary) and YouTube (with English commentary). Cage Warriors (CWFC). Based in London, England, UK. Broadcasts their fights locally on BT Sport and on UFC Fight Pass. Main article: List of professional MMA training camps There are hundreds of MMA training facilities throughout the world. [80] [81] These are the current top MMA Gyms in the world based on how many top ranked UFC fighters they currently train. There are 160 fighters, who train at over 80 different gyms, in the top 15 of the UFC's 10 divisions. The rankings are based on a system where a champion earns their gym 25 points, A #1 contender is 15, a #2 contender 10 and then a decrease in ranking equaling a decrease of 1 point until the ranking reaches #10. From there, rankings 11–15 are each worth one point. (updated July 2015): [82] Nova União located in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Jackson-Winkeljohn MMA located in Albuquerque, New Mexico American Top Team (ATT) located in Coconut Creek, Florida. Kings MMA located in Huntington Beach, California. Blackzilians located in Boca Raton, Florida. Serra-Longo located in Long Island, New York. Black House (Team Nogueira) based out of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Fighter development[ edit ] As a result of an increased number of competitors, organized training camps, information sharing, and modern kinesiology , the understanding of the effectiveness of various strategies has been greatly improved. UFC commentator Joe Rogan claimed that martial arts evolved more in the ten years following 1993 than in the preceding 700 years combined. [84] "During his reign atop the sport in the late 1990s he was the prototype – he could strike with the best strikers; he could grapple with the best grapplers; his endurance was second to none. " — describing UFC champion Frank Shamrock 's early dominance [85] The high profile of modern MMA promotions such as UFC and Pride has fostered an accelerated development of the sport. The early 1990s saw a wide variety of traditional styles competing in the sport. [86] However, early competition saw varying levels of success among disparate styles. In the early 1990s, practitioners of grappling based styles such as Brazilian jiu-jitsu dominated competition in the United States. Practitioners of striking based arts such as boxing , kickboxing , and karate , who were unfamiliar with submission grappling, proved to be unprepared to deal with its submission techniques . [87] [88] [89] [90] [91] As competitions became more and more common, those with a base in striking arts became more competitive as they cross-trained in styles based around takedowns and submission holds. [91] Likewise, those from the varying grappling styles added striking techniques to their arsenal. This increase of cross-training resulted in fighters becoming increasingly multidimensional and well-rounded in their skill-sets. The new hybridization of fighting styles can be seen in the technique of "ground and pound" developed by wrestling-based UFC pioneers such as Dan Severn , Don Frye and Mark Coleman . These wrestlers realized the need for the incorporation of strikes on the ground as well as on the feet, and incorporated ground striking into their grappling-based styles. Mark Coleman stated at UFC 14 that his strategy was to "Ground him and pound him", which may be the first televised use of the term. Since the late 1990s, both strikers and grapplers have been successful at MMA, though it is rare to see any fighter who is not schooled in both striking and grappling arts reach the highest levels of competition. Main article: Mixed martial arts rules MMA gloves . They are fingerless gloves which allow both striking and grappling to occur. The rules for modern mixed martial arts competitions have changed significantly since the early days of vale tudo , Japanese shoot wrestling , and UFC 1 , and even more from the historic style of pankration . As the knowledge of fighting techniques spread among fighters and spectators, it became clear that the original minimalist rule systems needed to be amended. [98] The main motivations for these rule changes were protection of the health of the fighters, the desire to shed the perception of "barbarism and lawlessness", and to be recognized as a legitimate sport.[ citation needed ] The new rules included the introduction of weight classes ; as knowledge about submissions spread, differences in weight had become a significant factor. There are nine different weight classes in the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts . These nine weight classes include flyweight (up to 125 lb / 56.7 kg), bantamweight (up to 135 lb / 61.2 kg), featherweight (up to 145 lb / 65.8 kg), lightweight (up to 155 lb / 70.3 kg), welterweight (up to 170 lb / 77.1 kg), middleweight (up to 185 lb / 83.9 kg), light heavyweight (up to 205 lb / 93.0 kg), heavyweight (up to 265 lb / 120.2 kg), and super heavyweight with no upper weight limit. [68] Small, open-fingered gloves were introduced to protect fists, reduce the occurrence of cuts (and stoppages due to cuts) and encourage fighters to use their hands for striking to allow more captivating matches. Gloves were first made mandatory in Japan's Shooto promotion and were later adopted by the UFC as it developed into a regulated sport. Most professional fights have the fighters wear 4 oz gloves, whereas some jurisdictions require amateurs to wear a slightly heavier 6 oz glove for more protection for the hands and wrists. Time limits were established to avoid long fights with little action where competitors conserved their strength. Matches without time limits also complicated the airing of live events. The time limits in most professional fights are three 5 minute rounds, and championship fights are normally five 5-minute rounds. Similar motivations produced the "stand up" rule, where the referee can stand fighters up if it is perceived that both are resting on the ground or not advancing toward a dominant position. [98] In the U.S., state athletic and boxing commissions have played a crucial role in the introduction of additional rules because they oversee MMA in a similar fashion to boxing. In Japan and most of Europe, there is no regulating authority over competitions, so these organizations have greater freedom in rule development and event structure.[ citation needed ] Previously, Japan-based organization Pride Fighting Championships held an opening 10-minute round followed by two five-minute rounds. Stomps, soccer kicks and knees to the head of a grounded opponent are legal, but elbow strikes to the head are not. [99] This rule set is more predominant in the Asian-based organizations as opposed to European and American rules. More recently, Singapore-based organization ONE Championship allows soccer kicks and knees to the head of a grounded opponent as well as elbow strikes to the head, but does not allow head stomps. [100] In 2016, ONE later banned soccer kicks. [101] However, they still allow knees to the head of a grounded opponent. UFC 74 ; Clay Guida vs. Marcus Aurelio Victory in a match is normally gained either by the judges' decision after an allotted amount of time has elapsed, a stoppage by the referee (for example if a competitor cannot defend themself intelligently) or the fight doctor (due to an injury), a submission , by a competitor's cornerman throwing in the towel, or by knockout . Knockout (KO)[ edit ] As soon as a fighter is unable to continue due to legal strikes, his opponent is declared the winner. As MMA rules allow submissions and ground and pound , the fight is stopped to prevent further injury to the fighter. Technical knockout (TKO)[ edit ] Referee stoppage: The referee may stop a match in progress if: a fighter becomes dominant to the point where the opponent cannot intelligently defend themself and is taking excessive damage as a result a fighter appears to be losing consciousness as he/she is being struck a fighter appears to have a significant injury such as a cut or a broken bone Doctor stoppage/cut: the referee will call for a time out if a fighter's ability to continue is in question as a result of apparent injuries, such as a large cut. The ring doctor will inspect the fighter and stop the match if the fighter is deemed unable to continue safely, rendering the opponent the winner. However, if the match is stopped as a result of an injury from illegal actions by the opponent, either a disqualification or no contest will be issued instead. Corner stoppage: a fighter's corner may announce defeat on the fighter's behalf by throwing in the towel during the match in progress or between rounds. This is normally done when a fighter is being beaten to the point where it is dangerous and unnecessary to continue. In some cases, the fighter may be injured. Retirement: a fighter is so dazed or exhausted that he/she cannot physically continue fighting. Usually occurs between rounds. A fighter may admit defeat during a match by: a physical tap on the opponent's body or mat/floor tapping verbally Technical Submission: the referee stops the match when the fighter is caught in a submission hold and is in danger of being injured. This can occur when a fighter is choked unconscious, or when a bone has been broken in a submission hold (a broken arm due to a kimura, etc.) Decision[ edit ] If the match goes the distance, then the outcome of the bout is determined by three judges. The judging criteria are organization-specific. Technical decision: in the unified rules of MMA, if a fighter is unable to continue due to an accidental illegal technique late in the fight, a technical decision is rendered by the judges based on who is ahead on the judges' scorecards at that time. In a three-round fight, two rounds must be completed for a technical decision to be awarded and in a five-round fight, three rounds must be completed. Other conditions[ edit ] Forfeit: a fighter or their representative may forfeit a match prior to the beginning of the match, thereby losing the match. Disqualification: a "warning" will be given when a fighter commits a foul or illegal action or does not follow the referee's instruction. Three warnings will result in a disqualification. Moreover, if a fighter is unable to continue due to a deliberate illegal technique from his opponent, the opponent will be disqualified. No contest: in the event that both fighters commit a violation of the rules, or a fighter is unable to continue due to an injury from an accidental illegal technique, the match will be declared a "no contest", except in the case of a technical decision in the unified rules. A result can also be overturned to a no contest if the fighter that was originally victorious fails a post fight drug test for banned substances. MMA fighters are ranked according to their performance and outcome of their fights and level of competition they faced. The most popular and used, ranking portals are: Fight Matrix : Ranks up to 250–500 fighters worldwide for every possible division male and female. Sherdog : Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide only for current available UFC divisions. Also used by ESPN. SB Nation : Ranks top 14 fighters worldwide only for male divisions. Also used by USA Today . MMAjunkie.com : Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide for current UFC available divisions. UFC : Ranks top 15 contenders, UFC signed fighters only, as per UFC divisions. (For example: #2 means the fighter is #3 for the UFC, behind the Champion and the #1.) Tapology: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide for every possible division. [102] Ranking MMA: Top 50 MMA World Rankings for all Men's Divisions and Top 25 MMA World Rankings for all Women's Divisions. RankingMMA publishes Independent Mixed Martial Arts rankings that does not exclude any fighter based on their promotion. RankingMMA also provides UFC Rankings (Complete Roster), Historical MMA Rankings, Non-UFC Rankings, and MMA Prospect Rankings. Ranking MMA has published MMA World Rankings since 2006. Sports Illustrated : Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide for current UFC available divisions. [103] MMA Rising: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide in every possible division. [104] Notable for their Unified Women's Mixed Martial Arts. Rankings [105] [106] MMA Weekly: Ranks top 10 male fighters worldwide in every possible division, and P4P for female fighters. [107] Also used by Yahoo! Sports . Bleacher Report : Ranks top 10 UFC fighters in each division. Fight! Magazine: Ranks top 5 fighters and only in male divisions. [108] Oddsshark.com: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide in current UFC divisions. GroundandPound.de: Ranks top 10 European male fighters in all divisions. [109] MMAViking: Ranks top 5 Scandinavian male fighters in all divisions and Scandinavian female pound for pound. [110] Clothing[ edit ] Mixed martial arts promotions typically require that male fighters wear shorts in addition to being barechested , thus precluding the use of gi or fighting kimono to inhibit or assist submission holds. Male fighters are required by most athletic commissions to wear groin protectors underneath their trunks. [68] Female fighters wear short shorts and sports bras or other similarly snug-fitting tops. Both male and female fighters are required to wear a mouthguard . [68] [111] The need for flexibility in the legs combined with durability prompted the creation of various fighting shorts brands, which then spawned a range of mixed martial arts clothing and casual wear available to the public.[ citation needed ] Fighting area[ edit ] According to the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts, an MMA competition or exhibition may be held in a ring or a fenced area. The fenced area can be round or have at least six sides. Cages vary: some replace the metal fencing with a net, others have a different shape from an octagon, as the term "The Octagon" is trademarked by the UFC (though the 8-sided shape itself is not trademarked). [112] The fenced area is called a cage generically, or a hexagon, an octagon or an octagon cage, depending on the shape. A ring used by PRIDE . An octagon cage used by the UFC. Ground : Brazilian jiu-jitsu , judo , sambo , folkstyle , freestyle wrestling , Greco-Roman wrestling and luta livre are trained to improve ground control and position, as well as to achieve submission holds , and defend against them. Most styles have been adapted from their traditional forms, such as boxing stances, which lack effective counters to leg kicks, the Muay Thai stance, which is poor for defending against takedowns due to its static nature, and judo or Brazilian jiu-jitsu techniques, which must be adapted for no-gi competition. It is common for a fighter to train with multiple coaches of different styles or an organized fight team to improve various aspects of their game at once. Cardiovascular conditioning , speed drills, strength training and flexibility are also important aspects of a fighter's training. Some schools advertise their styles as simply "mixed martial arts", which has become a style in itself, but the training will still often be split into different sections. While mixed martial arts was initially practiced almost exclusively by competitive fighters, this is no longer the case. As the sport has become more mainstream and more widely taught, it has become accessible to wider range of practitioners of all ages. Proponents of this sort of training argue that it is safe for anyone, of any age, with varying levels of competitiveness and fitness. [114] [115] Brazilian jiu-jitsu/Submission grappling[ edit ] Main pages: Wrestling and Mixed martial artists utilizing wrestling Wrestling (including freestyle , Greco-Roman and American folkstyle ) gained tremendous respect due to its effectiveness in mixed martial arts competitions. It is widely studied by mixed martial artists as Wrestling allows competitors to control where the match will go: superior wrestlers can dominate the Clinch and take their opponents into the ground with its excellent takedowns , particularly against the legs, where they will transition into groundfighting and can either get a superior top position and start striking their opponent (a tactic known as Ground-and-Pound) [116] or start grappling for submissions. While wrestlers with stronger striking base can use defensive wrestling to defend takedowns maintain the fight in the feet where they use their superior striking, a tactic known as " Sprawl -and-Brawl", [117] or use wrestling to escape submission attempts. It is also credited for conferring an emphasis on conditioning for explosive movement and stamina, both of which are critical in competitive mixed martial arts. Groundfighting in MMA. Differently from other grappling -based martial arts, you are allowed to strike your opponent when fighting on the ground. There are multiple wrestling styles around the world which MMA fighters have as their base. American fighters are usually trained in Folkstyle wrestling , the style competed in high school and college competitions. Many American champions were former NCAA Division I Wrestling Champions , such as Kevin Randleman and Mark Kerr . While fighters from around the world train primarily in "international" olympic styles such as Greco-Roman and Freestyle wrestling . Some former wrestlers who competed in the Olympics have joined MMA competition, such as Daniel Cormier , Dan Henderson , Ben Askren , silver medalists Matt Lindland and Yoel Romero , and gold medalist Henry Cejudo . [118] Some fighters have also come from local Folk wrestling backgrounds, UFC flyweight champion Deiveson Figueiredo is trained at Luta Marajoara, a folk wrestling style from Marajó island . [119] Main pages: Greco-Roman wrestling and Mixed martial artists utilizing Greco-Roman wrestling Greco-Roman wrestling is one of two styles of wrestling contested at the Olympic Games, the other being Freestyle. Greco-Roman wrestling only allows for holds above the waist and has a strong emphasis on clinch fighting. Due to the difficulty to achieve takedowns when one is not allowed to attack the legs, Greco-Roman is not utilized in MMA as often as styles that do allow fighters to attack the legs, like Freestyle and Catch. Despite this, there have been fighters who come from a background in Greco-Roman wrestling. Notable examples are Randy Couture , Dan Henderson , Mark Madsen , Matt Lindland (all four were Olympic wrestlers or Olympic alternates), Dan Severn , Jon Jones , Ilia Topuria , Alexander Volkanovski , Magomed Ankalaev and Sergei Pavlovich . Main pages: Boxing and Mixed martial artists utilizing boxing Boxing is a combat form that is widely used in MMA and is one of the primary striking bases for many fighters. [120] Boxing punches account for the vast majority of strikes during the stand up portion of a bout and also account for the largest number of significant strikes, knock downs and KOs in MMA matches. [121] Several aspects of boxing are extremely valuable such as footwork, combinations, and defensive techniques like slips, head movement and stance (including chin protection and keeping hands up) commonly known as the Guard position. [122] Boxing-based fighters have also been shown to throw and land a higher volume of strikes when compared with other striking bases, at a rate of 3.88 per minute with 9.64 per minute thrown (compared with Muay Thai at 3.46 and 7.50, respectively). [120] Fighters known for using boxing include: Petr Yan , Dustin Poirier , Conor McGregor , Max Holloway , Rob Font , Calvin Kattar , Sean Strickland , Cain Velasquez , Nick Diaz , Glover Teixeira , José Aldo , Ilia Topuria , Junior dos Santos , B.J. Penn , Dan Hardy , Shane Carwin , Jack Della Maddalena , Francis Ngannou , Alexander Gustafsson , Jamahal Hill , Justin Gaethje and Andrei Arlovski . Main pages: Luta Livre and Mixed martial artists utilizing luta livre Luta Livre (also referred to Luta Livre Brasileira, Submission or Esportiva) is a Brazilian submission wrestling style, developed in Brazil in the 1920s by catch wrestling practitioner Euclydes "Tatu" Hatem , including techniques from catch wrestling , judo , wrestling and Brazilian jiu-jitsu . Luta livre is divided in the categories of esportiva, which is a form of submission grappling, differentiating from no-gi BJJ with its focus on quick and energetic submissions, and vale tudo , which includes strikes both standing up and on the ground in addition to grappling and submissions. [123] Luta livre was important to the development of mixed martial arts, as rivalry between jiu-jitsu and luta livre fueled the vale tudo scene. However, the success of Brazilian jiu-jitsu over luta livre practitioners, especially after the Desafio: Jiu Jitsu vs Luta Livre event in 1991 (which was broadcast live by Rede Globo ), resulted in the style waning in popularity, [124] although it seems to be making a resurgence, especially as an alternative to both Brazilian jiu-jitsu and catch wrestling. [125] Some notable luta livre practitioners in MMA include: Marco Ruas , Eugenio Tadeu , José Aldo , Renato Sobral , Pedro Rizzo , Alexandre Franca Nogueira , Terry Etim , Jesus Pinedo and Darren Till . Fighter performs a takedown on his opponent. Main pages: Judo and Mixed martial artists utilizing judo Judo is a Japanese grappling martial art which has both ne-waza (ground grappling) and tachi-waza (standing grappling), several judo practitioners have competed in mixed martial arts matches. They use their knowledge in judo for clinching and for doing explosive and fast takedowns which quickly transition into submission holds in the ground. However, judo is traditionally and exclusively trained using the judogi , as such, many techniques and strategies from judo can not be translated into MMA. [126] Fighters who hold a black belt in judo include Fedor Emelianenko , Marco Ruas , Khabib Nurmagomedov , Ian Garry , Dong Hyun Kim , Cub Swanson , Don Frye , Antônio Rodrigo Nogueira , Fabricio Werdum , Vitor Belfort , Benoît Saint-Denis , Merab Dvalishvili , Reinier de Ridder and Olympian judokas Ronda Rousey , [127] Hector Lombard , Rick Hawn [128] and Hidehiko Yoshida . Former WEC middleweight champion Paulo Filho has credited judo for his success in an interview. [129] Main pages: Sambo (martial art) and Mixed martial artists utilizing sambo Sambo is a Russian martial art, combat sport and self-defense system. [130] It is a mixture of judo and freestyle wrestling using a keikogi known as kurtka . Sambo focuses on throwing, takedowns, grappling, and includes submissions from judo and catch wrestling . Sports sambo is characterized as a grappling style focused in pinning and in explosive takedowns which can be quickly transitioned into devastating leglocks . Sambo also has a modality known as combat sambo, which adds punches, kicks, elbows and knees, making it a proto-MMA hybrid fighting style. Sambo is popular in Russia and eastern Europe, where it is taught as a complement to judo and wrestling training, Sambo also provides a good base for MMA with all-around skills for combining grappling and striking. Some notable Sambo fighters that transitioned into MMA include: Fedor Emelianenko , Igor Vovchanchyn , Oleg Taktarov , Andrei Arlovski , Yaroslav Amosov , Khabib Nurmagomedov , Islam Makhachev and Shavkat Rakhmonov . Main pages: Karate and Mixed martial artists utilizing karate Karate is a striking-based Japanese with Okinawan origins martial art using punches, kicks, sometimes elbows, knees and even limited grappling. It is divided in various schools and styles , which distinguishes techniques, training methods, among other things. Some styles, especially Kyokushin and other full contact styles, has proven to be effective in MMA as it is one of the core foundations of kickboxing, and specializes in striking techniques. [131] [132] [133] [134] Karate from all styles has also been a common base, with many getting introduced to martial arts and combat sports by training Karate in their youth. Various styles of karate are practiced by some MMA fighters, notably Chuck Liddell , Bas Rutten , Lyoto Machida , Stephen Thompson , John Makdessi , Uriah Hall , Ryan Jimmo , Georges St-Pierre , Kyoji Horiguchi , Giga Chikadze , Robert Whittaker , Henry Cejudo , and Louis Gaudinot . Liddell is known to have an extensive striking background in Kenpō with Fabio Martella . [135] Lyoto Machida practices Shotokan Ryu, [136] and St-Pierre practices Kyokushin . [137] Main pages: Sanshou and Mixed martial artists utilizing wushu Sanda, or Sanshou, is one of the two disciplines of sport wushu . It is a modernized and full contact version of wushu, created in the late 20th century as a condensation of traditional Chinese kung fu techniques to be used in a full contact competition environment. [138] [139] It is a kickboxing style which has punching , kicking , some use of elbows and knee strikes —similar to Kickboxing or Muay Thai— but it has the distinction of allowing a range of takedowns , throws and sweeps , similar to judo and wrestling. [138] [140] They can be highly effective in competition due to their mixture of striking and takedowns, which can be easily synthesized with the rest of MMA training, such as groundfighting. [140] It is prominently used by fighters from China, but it has found a following amongst many fighters around the world. [140] Chief amongst these fighters is Cung Le , who is most notable for his TKO and KO victories over former UFC champions Frank Shamrock and Rich Franklin, and UFC strawweight champion Zhang Weili , the first Chinese champion in the UFC. Other wushu sanshou based fighters who have entered MMA include Michael Page , Song Yadong , K. J. Noons , Pat Barry , Zhang Tiequan , [141] Muslim Salihov , [142] and Zabit Magomedsharipov . [143] Main pages: Taekwondo and Mixed martial artists utilizing taekwondo Taekwondo is a Korean martial art , emerging in the 1950s as a mixture between Japanese Karate, traditional Korean martial arts and some Chinese kung fu. It is a striking-based style with heavy focus on various styles of kicking, such as head-height kicks, spinning jump kicks, and fast kicking techniques. [144] Several accomplished MMA fighters have an extensive background in taekwondo, and many were introduced to martial arts through it. [145] [146] Some fighters who use taekwondo techniques in MMA are former UFC lightweight champion and WEC lightweight champion Anthony Pettis , who is 3rd dan black belt as well as an instructor, [147] Benson Henderson , Yair Rodriguez , Marco Ruas and former UFC middleweight champion Anderson Silva , who is a 5th dan black belt. [148] In his instructional book, Anderson Silva admitted the influence of taekwondo in the formation of his unique style. "In each of my fights, I tried to utilize techniques from all the various styles I had studied. I threw taekwondo kicks. I threw Muay Thai knees and elbows, and I used my knowledge of Brazilian jiu-jitsu on the ground." [149] Anthony Pettis has also stated that he is "definitely a traditional martial artist first and a mixed martial artist second", [147] as well as his "style of attacking is different [because of his] taekwondo background." [150] Main pages: Capoeira and Mixed martial artists utilizing capoeira Capoeira has been incorporated into MMA in more recent years and is often used as an addition to Brazilian jiu-jitsu; both originate from Brazil. Several fighters use this martial art when fighting, although not fully, as music and dancing are major components of the discipline. Anderson Silva , Conor McGregor , Deiveson Figueiredo , Thiago Santos , Marco Ruas and Michel Pereira incorporated some techniques and has in turn helped capoeira gain more attention in MMA. It is known for its quick and complex maneuvers, which use power, speed, and leverage across a wide variety of kicks, spins and techniques. Main pages: Savate and Mixed martial artists utilizing savate Although not as common as other disciplines, some fighters have used Savate effectively in MMA. Savate restricts the use of shins and knees, allowing only foot kicks. It focuses on kicking more than punching, and its kicks are characteristically very fast, mobile and flexible. It also possesses a complex and evasive footwork. However, because Savatuers train wearing shoes, adjustments have to be made to how they throw kicks in MMA. Notable Savate fighters include Karl Amoussou , Gerard Gordeau , Cheick Kongo , and former Bellator Light Heavyweight Champion Christian M'Pumbu . The techniques utilized in mixed martial arts competition generally fall into two categories: striking techniques (such as kicks , knees , punches and elbows ) and grappling techniques (such as clinch holds , pinning holds , submission holds , sweeps , takedowns and throws ). Today, mixed martial artists must cross-train in a variety of styles to counter their opponent's strengths and remain effective in all the phases of combat and have a strategy . Main page: Sprawl-and-brawl fighters Sprawl-and-Brawl is a stand-up fighting tactic that consists of effective stand-up striking while avoiding ground fighting typically by using sprawls to defend against takedowns or throws . [117] A Sprawl-and-Brawler is usually a boxer , kickboxer , or karateka who has trained in various styles of wrestling , judo , and/or sambo to avoid takedowns to keep the fight standing. This is a form which is heavily practiced in the amateur leagues. These fighters will often study submission wrestling to avoid being forced into submission should they find themselves on the ground. This style can be deceptively different from traditional kickboxing styles, since sprawl-and-brawlers must adapt their techniques to incorporate takedown and ground fighting defense. A few notable examples are Igor Vovchanchyn , Mirko Filipović , Chuck Liddell , Mark Hunt and more recently Junior dos Santos , Justin Gaethje , Andrei Arlovski , [151] and Joanna Jędrzejczyk . [152] Gina Carano applying a ground-and-pound on her opponent. Main page: Ground-and-pound fighters Ground-and-pound is a strategy consisting of taking an opponent to the ground using a takedown or throw, obtaining a top, or dominant grappling position , and then striking the opponent, primarily with fists, hammerfists , and elbows. Ground-and-pound is also used as a precursor to attempting submission holds. The style is used by fighters well-versed in submission defense and skilled at takedowns. They take the fight to the ground, maintain a grappling position, and strike until their opponent submits or is knocked out . Although not a traditional style of striking, the effectiveness and reliability of ground-and-pound has made it a popular tactic. It was first demonstrated as an effective technique by Mark Coleman , then popularized by fighters such as Chael Sonnen , Glover Teixeira , Don Frye , Frank Trigg , Jon Jones , Cheick Kongo , Mark Kerr , Frank Shamrock , Tito Ortiz , Matt Hughes , Chris Weidman , and Khabib Nurmagomedov . [116] While most fighters use ground-and-pound statically, by way of holding their opponents down and mauling them with short strikes from the top position, a few fighters manage to utilize it dynamically by striking their opponents while changing positions, thus not allowing their opponents to settle once they take them down. Cain Velasquez is one of the most devastating ground strikers in MMA and is known for continuing to strike his opponents on the ground while transitioning between positions. [153] Fedor Emelianenko , considered among the greatest masters of ground-and-pound in MMA history, was the first to demonstrate this dynamic style of striking in transition. He was striking his opponents on the ground while passing guard , or while his opponents were attempting to recover guard. [154] [155] In the year 2000, MMA play-by-play commentator Stephen Quadros coined the popular phrase lay and pray. This refers to a situation where a wrestler or grappler keeps another fighter pinned or controlled on the mat to avoid a stand up, yet exhibits little urgency to finish the grounded opponent with a knockout or a submission for the majority or entirety of the fight. [156] The implication of "lay and pray" is that after the wrestler/grappler takes the striker down and 'lays' on him to neutralize the opponent's striking weapons, he 'pray's that the referee does not return them to the standing position. This style is considered by many fans as the most boring style of fighting and is highly criticized for intentionally creating non-action, yet it is effective. Some argue that 'lay-and-pray' is justified and that it is the responsibility of the downed fighter to be able to protect himself from this legitimate fighting technique. [156] [157] [158] [159] Many consider Jon Fitch 's style to epitomize 'lay and pray'. [160] Former UFC Welterweight champion Georges St-Pierre has been criticized by fans for playing it safe and applying the lay-and-pray tactic in his fights, [161] as has former Bellator MMA Welterweight champion Ben Askren , who justified the tactic, explaining that championship fights are much harder, as they are five rounds long compared with the usual three. [162] MMA fighter attempts a Triangle - Armbar submission on his opponent. Submission-seeking[ edit ] Submission-seeking is a reference to the strategy of taking an opponent to the ground using a takedown or throw and then applying a submission hold , forcing the opponent to submit . While grapplers will often work to attain dominant position, some may be more comfortable fighting from other positions. It enable fighters to force opponents into submission through joint locks or chokes. Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu (BJJ) plays a significant role in MMA submission grappling, with techniques like armbars, triangles, rear-naked chokes, guillotines, and kimuras being commonly utilized. [163] If a grappler finds themselves unable to force a takedown, they may resort to pulling guard , whereby they physically pull their opponent into a dominant position on the ground. [164] This was one of the first fighting styles that had shown success, popularized by BJJ exponent Royce Gracie during early UFC events.  Submissions are an essential part of many disciplines, most notably Brazilian jiu-jitsu , catch wrestling , judo , sambo , luta livre and shoot wrestling . Submission-based styles were popularized in the early UFC events by Royce Gracie and Ken Shamrock , and were the dominant tactic in the early UFCs. Modern proponents of the submission-seeking style, such as Demian Maia , Ronaldo Souza , Charles Oliveira , Ryan Hall , Marcin Held , and Paul Craig tend to come from a Brazilian jiu-jitsu background. [165] Clinch-fighting[ edit ] Clinch-Fighting is a tactic consisting of using a clinch hold to prevent the opponent from moving away into more distant striking range, while also attempting takedowns or throws and striking the opponent using knees , stomps , elbows , and punches . The clinch is often utilized by wrestlers and judokas that have added components of the striking game (typically boxing), and Muay Thai fighters. Ken Shamrock was known for his impressive clinch work when he submitted Dan Severn with a standing guillotine choke at UFC 6 Wrestlers and judoka may use clinch fighting as a way to neutralize the superior striking skills of a stand-up fighter to prevent takedowns or throws by a superior ground fighter. Ronda Rousey , with her judo background, is considered a master at initiating throws from the clinch to set up armbars . [166] The clinch or "plum" of a Muay Thai fighter is often used to improve the accuracy of knees and elbows by physically controlling the position of the opponent. Anderson Silva is well known for his devastating Muay Thai clinch. He defeated UFC middle weight champion Rich Franklin using the Muay Thai clinch and kneeing Franklin repeatedly to the body and face – breaking Franklin's nose. In their rematch Silva repeated this and won again. [167] Other fighters may use the clinch to push their opponent against the cage or ropes, where they can effectively control their opponent's movement and restrict mobility while striking them with punches to the body or stomps also known as dirty boxing or "Wall and Maul". Randy Couture used his Greco-Roman wrestling background to popularize this style en route to six title reigns in the Ultimate Fighting Championship. [168] Score-oriented fighting[ edit ] Especially used by fighters with strong wrestling background when facing a highly skilled grappler, or by wrestlers who prefer stand-up fights . Usually fighters who adopt this strategy use takedowns only for scoring , allowing the adversary to stand up and continue the fight. They also want to land clear strikes and control the octagon. In order to win the fight by decision all score oriented fighters have to have strong defensive techniques and avoid takedowns. [169] In general, fighters who cannot win fights through lightning offense, or are more suited to win fights in the later rounds or via decision are commonly known as grinders.  Grinders aim to shut down their opponent's game plan and chip away at them via clinching, smothering and ground-and-pound for most of the rounds. Prominent examples of grinders are Pat Healy , [170] Chael Sonnen , [171] and Colby Covington . Women's mixed martial arts[ edit ] Main article: Women's mixed martial arts While mixed martial arts is primarily a male dominated sport, it does have female athletes. Female competition in Japan includes promotions such as the all-female Valkyrie , and Jewels (formerly known as Smackgirl ). [172] However historically there has been only a select few major professional mixed martial arts organizations in the United States that invite women to compete. Among those are Strikeforce , Bellator Fighting Championships , the all female Invicta Fighting Championships , and the now defunct EliteXC .[ citation needed ] There has been a growing awareness of women in mixed martial arts due to popular female fighters and personalities such as Megumi Fujii , Miesha Tate , Cristiane "Cyborg" Santos , Ronda Rousey , Joanna Jędrzejczyk , Holly Holm and Gina Carano among others. Carano became known as "the face of women's MMA" after appearing in a number of EliteXC events. This was furthered by her appearances on MGM Television's 2008 revival of their game show American Gladiators .[ citation needed ] Additionally, U.S. Congresswoman Sharice Davids ( D - KS - 3 ), elected in 2018 , is a former professional MMA fighter. History[ edit ] In Japan, female competition has been documented since the mid-1990s. Influenced by female professional wrestling and kickboxing , the Smackgirl competition was formed in 2001 and became the only major all-female promotion in mixed martial arts. Other early successful Japanese female organizations included Ladies Legend Pro-Wrestling , ReMix (a predecessor to Smackgirl), U-Top Tournament, K-Grace, and AX.[ citation needed ] Aside from all-female organizations, most major Japanese male dominated promotions have held select female competitions. These have included DEEP , MARS, Gladiator, HEAT, Cage Force, K-1 , Sengoku , Shooto (under the name G-Shooto), and Pancrase (under the name Pancrase Athena).[ citation needed ] In the United States, prior to the success of The Ultimate Fighter reality show that launched mixed martial arts into the mainstream media,[ citation needed ] there was no major coverage of female competitions. Some early organizations who invited women to compete included, International Fighting Championships, SuperBrawl, King of the Cage , Rage in the Cage, Ring of Combat, Bas Rutten Invitational, and HOOKnSHOOT. From the mid-2000s, more coverage came when organizations such as Strikeforce , EliteXC , Bellator Fighting Championships , and Shark Fights invited women to compete. Outside Japan and the United States, female competition is almost exclusively found in minor local promotions. However, in Europe some major organizations have held select female competitions, including It's Showtime , Shooto Europe, Cage Warriors , and M-1 Global . Following Zuffa's acquisition of Strikeforce in March 2011, [173] [174] [175] [176] the UFC began promoting women's fights, with Ronda Rousey rapidly becoming one of the promotion's biggest draws. [177] Controversy arose in 2013, when CFA (Championship Fighting Alliance) fighter Fallon Fox came out as a transgender woman. The case became a centerpiece of debates concerning whether it was fair to have a transgender woman compete against cisgender women in a contact sport. [178] Neither the UFC nor Invicta FC says they will allow her to fight, and then-UFC Bantamweight champion Ronda Rousey said she would not fight her. [179] Amateur mixed martial arts[ edit ] Amateur Mixed Martial Arts is the amateur version of the Mixed Martial Arts in which participants engage largely or entirely without remuneration. Under the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF) and World MMA Association (WMMAA), it is practiced within a safe and regulated environment which relies on a fair and objective scoring system and competition procedures similar to those in force in the professional Mixed Martial Arts rules . [180] [181] Amateur MMA is practiced with board shorts and with approved protection gear that includes shin protectors, and amateur MMA gloves . The International Mixed Martial Arts Federation and the World Mixed Martial Arts Association announced an amalgamation on April 11, 2018, uniting the two organisations behind one bid for Olympic sport recognition after being instructed by Global Association of International Sport Federations (GAISF). The WMMAA and the IMMAF signed a legally binding affiliation memorandum of understanding (MOU) in May 2018 and finalized the agreement by November 2018, along with the first unfiied world championships. [182] [183] World Mixed Martial Arts Association[ edit ] World Mixed Martial Arts Association (WMMAA) was founded in 2012 in Monaco by M-1 Global commercial promoters and is under the leadership of the General Secretary Alexander Endelgarth, President Finkelstein and Fedor Emelianenko. [184] [185] [186] [187] The World MMA Association was an organization that managed and developed mixed martial arts, establishing rules and procedures, hosting MMA competitions. On October 20, 2013, the first World MMA Championship was held in Saint Petersburg, Russia. [188] By December 2013, WMMAA had 38 member states, representing the sport and registered in accordance with national laws.. In 2017, WMMAA had expanded to 83 members: Afghanistan, Albania, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Colombia, Czech Republic, France, Guatemala, Georgia, Greece, India, Iran, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Venezuela. [189] International Mixed Martial Arts Federation[ edit ] Main article: International Mixed Martial Arts Federation On February 29, 2012, the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF) was set up to bring international structure, development and support to mixed martial arts worldwide. [190] IMMAF launched with support of market leader, the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) . [191] [192] The IMMAF is a non-profit, democratic federation organized according to international federation standards to ensure that MMA as a sport is allowed the same recognition, representation and rights as all other major sports. The IMMAF is registered under Swedish law and is founded on democratic principles, as outlined in their statutes. [193] As of March 2015, there are 39 total members from 38 [194] countries, which come from Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, India, Ireland (Northern Ireland), Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Lithuania, Malaysia, Nepal, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Romania, The Seychelles, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America. [194] The IMMAF held its first Amateur World Championships in Las Vegas, US, from June 30 to July 6, 2014. [195] [196] [197] Safety[ edit ] A ring-side doctor attends to a fighter following a loss. Mixed Martial Arts competitions have changed dramatically since the first Ultimate Fighting Championship in 1993, specifically with the inception of the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts . There remains a paucity of data on injuries that occur in MMA, and resulting concerns with regard to MMA's safety remain. A 2014 systematic review concluded that the injury incidence rate in MMA appears to be greater than in most, if not all, other popular and commonly practiced combat sports. [198] Injury rates[ edit ] In a 2014 meta-analysis of the available injury data in MMA, the injury incidence rate was estimated to be 228.7 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures (one athlete-exposure is defined as one athlete participating in a single fight). [198] The estimated injury incidence rate in MMA is greater than in other full-contact combat sports such as judo (44.0 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures), [199] taekwondo (79.4 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures), [200] amateur boxing (77.7 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures), [201] and professional boxing (118.0–250.6 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures). [202] [203] [204] [205] Injury pattern[ edit ] In general, the injury pattern in MMA is very similar to that in professional boxing but unlike that found in other combat sports such as judo and taekwondo. [198] The most commonly injured body region is the head (66.8% to 78.0% of reported injuries) followed by the wrist/hand (6.0% to 12.0% of reported injuries), while the most frequent types of injury were laceration (36.7% to 59.4% of reported injuries), fracture (7.4% to 43.3% of reported injuries), and concussion (3.8% to 20.4% of reported injuries). [198] The frequency of impact to the ear and low utilization of ear protection leads to a high frequency of perichondral hematoma that can lead to cauliflower ear . [206] Brain injury and CTE[ edit ] See also: Chronic traumatic encephalopathy Knocking a person unconscious or even causing a concussion may cause permanent brain damage . [207] There is no clear division between the force required to knock a person out and the force likely to kill a person. [208] Also, contact sports, especially combat sports, are directly related to a brain disease called chronic traumatic encephalopathy , abbreviated CTE. This disease begins to develop during the life of the athlete, and continues to develop even after sports activity has ceased. In addition, repetitive and subconcussive blows to the head, and not just concussions, cause CTE. [209] [210] [211] [212] [213] [214] Because the disease is detected post-mortem, and MMA are relatively young, there are still few cases of CTE recognized in MMA, although there are more and more suspected and confirmed cases of CTE. [215] [216] In preliminary results reported in April 2012 as part of an ongoing study of a 109 professional boxers and MMA fighters being conducted by Charles Bernick and his colleagues at Cleveland Clinic's Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, fighters with more than six years of ring experience were observed to have reductions in size in their hippocampus and thalamus, while fighters with more than twelve years of ring experience were observed to have both reductions in size and symptoms such as memory loss (the hippocampus and thalamus deal with memory and alertness).  Bernick speculates that the cumulative damage over time from lesser blows may eventually prove an even more important topic of study than that of infrequent concussions. [217] In January 2021, veteran UFC fighter Spencer Fisher confirmed to MMA Fighting that he suffered from all the symptoms of CTE: "I'm just beat up, and it's just gotten worse, like all my injuries are catching up with me now, aside from the brain thing, which is the biggest one, because it adds, it adds the depression, and putting things, thoughts together and staying on track". Later, Dana White ruled on this: "He's not the first and he's definitely not going to be the last. This is a contact sport and anybody who's ever done this younger, myself included, is dealing with brain issues. It's part of the gig". [218] In late 2021, Rose Gracie, daughter of UFC founder Rorion Gracie, in an interview about CTE on the MMA Fighting podcast, calls lack of CTE awareness in MMA 'criminal negligence'. [219] Main article: Fatalities in mixed martial arts contests There have been seven known deaths in MMA to date. [220] [ failed verification ] There were no documented cases of deaths after a sanctioned MMA event prior to 2007. [221] Since 2007, there have been six fatalities in mixed martial arts matches. The first was the death of Sam Vasquez on November 30, 2007. [222] Vasquez collapsed shortly after being knocked out by Vince Libardi in the third round of an October 20, 2007, fight at the Toyota Center in Houston, Texas. [221] Vasquez had two separate surgeries to remove blood clots from his brain, and shortly after the second operation suffered a stroke and did not regain consciousness. [222] The second death stemming from a sanctioned mixed martial arts contest occurred in South Carolina on June 28, 2010, when 30-year-old Michael Kirkham was knocked out and never regained consciousness. He was pronounced dead two days after the fight. [223] The third death on August 11, 2012, involved 30 year old Tyrone Mims, who was making his amateur MMA debut at "Conflict MMA: Fight Night at the Point VI" in South Carolina, making his the second MMA-related death in the state. [224] After being TKO'd in the second round of the fight he became unresponsive and was taken to Medical University Hospital, where he was pronounced dead one hour later. No evidence of brain trauma or concussion was found and the initial autopsy has proved inconclusive. Coroner Rae Wooten explained that his death may likely have been from an irregular heartbeat caused by over exertion; however whether or not his death was a direct result of his fight remains a mystery. [225] On February 27, 2014, 29-year-old Booto Guylain was transported to Johannesburg General Hospital to be treated for swelling and bleeding on the brain after suffering a KO loss via elbow in the last round of his fight in South African promotion "Extreme Fighting Championship Africa". He was unable to make a recovery, and after one week in the hospital he was pronounced dead. [226] [227] On April 9, 2016, 28-year-old João Carvalho , died following a Total Extreme Fighting event at the National Stadium in Dublin (Ireland). The Portuguese fighter was beaten by technical knockout in a fight on 9 April 2016 against Charlie Ward , and fell ill twenty minutes after the fight. He was taken immediately to Beaumont hospital, where he underwent emergency brain surgery, but died two days later. [228] On July 15, 2017, after a TKO loss resulting from unanswered punches in the second round of his fight, 37 year old Donshay White became unresponsive and collapsed in his locker room and was rushed to the KentuckyOne Health Sts. Mary & Elizabeth Hospital in Kentucky. [229] He was soon pronounced dead and was revealed to be caused by hypertensive/atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. [230] Another death occurred in the UK on 17 November 2019 when 26-year-old Saeideh Aletaha died in hospital after being knocked out in the third round of a contest at Central Hall in Southampton that was part of the Fast and Furious fight series. [231] Legality of professional competitions[ edit ] This section may be too long to read and navigate comfortably. Consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings . Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page . (November 2020) Main article: Mixed martial arts in Australia MMA in Australia is permitted in all states and territories of Australia by various combat sports authorities and organizations. There is debate about the use of the cage, which was banned in Victoria in 2007 [232] and then relegalized in 2015. [233] The cage was banned in Western Australia in 2013, but its use was again permitted in 2017. [234] Bahrain[ edit ] MMA is legal in Bahrain. Bahrain National MMA Federation (BNMMAF) has been set up under the patronage of Sheikh Khalid bin Hamad Al Khalifa and the jurisdiction of the Sports Minister Sheikh Nasser bin Hamad Al Khalifa . [235] The development of MMA in the nation is convened through KHK MMA, which also owns Brave Combat Federation , which is the largest Mixed Martial Arts promotion in the Middle East. [236] Bahrain will be hosting World MMA Amateurs Championship 2017 supported by International Mixed Martial Arts Federation . [237] Belgium[ edit ] MMA is tolerated in Belgium but not supported. In May 2012 the Belgian MMA Federation (BMMAF) was accepted by the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation as its third member, after several years of carrying out many of the tasks of a national federation under the former name of the Belgian Shooto and MMA Federation. Active in developing MMA in Belgium from 2005, the group later redefined their activities to include MMA in order to be able to use a cage. Registered as a federation in Belgium in 2006, the former Belgian Shooto and MMA Federation organized more than 1500 MMA bouts (Amateur, B class and A class), and built a structure for the sport nationally that included insurance, rules and regulation, and experience levels for fighters and technical seminars. The BMMAF has continued its activities as part of the wider MMA community under IMMAF. [238] [239] [240] Main article: Mixed martial arts in Brazil January 17, 2013, saw the announcement that the Brazilian MMA Athletic Commission, or Comissao Atletica Brasileira de MMA (CABMMA), had joined the International MMA Federation. The CABMMA represents state federations across Brazil and is spearheaded by lawyers Giovanni Biscardi and Rafael Favettia, a former Executive Secretary of the Minister of Justice and Interim Minister of Justice. [241] The CABMMA supervised its first event with "UFC on FX 7" on January 19, 2013, at Ibirapuera Gymnasium in São Paulo. [242] [243] [244] The CABMMA first hit international sports headlines when it suspended fighter Rousimar Palhares for prolonging a submission on opponent Mike Pierce, despite him tapping several times, during UFC Fight Night 29 in Barueri, Brazil on October 9, 2013. [245] [246] The CABMMA was called to preside over another controversial situation involving a Brazilian competitor, when Vitor Belfort's use of Testosterone Replacement Therapy came to light over UFC on FX 8 (May 18, 2013) [247] Bulgaria[ edit ] Appearing on professional basis around 2008–2009, MMA is a new sport in Bulgaria and growing rapidly. With a strong wrestling and boxing culture in the region, general interest in the sport is huge. However, it remains unregulated. The Bulgarian Federation for Mixed Martial Arts was elected as the national federation representing the Republic of Bulgaria under the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation in October 2014; and like all IMMAF members, is a non-profit, democratic organization. Established in November 2013 by 10 MMA clubs, the organization is headed by UFC competitor Stanislav Nedkov. The federation's registration to the Ministry of Justice was approved in June 2014 and its application for formal recognition by the Ministry of Sport is in its advanced stages. [248] [249] Cambodia[ edit ] In January 2013, the Cambodian Mixed Martial Arts Association was created under the Cambodian Martial Arts Federation. At this time there are no MMA events organized with the CMMAA approval. Television channel MYTV holds its KWC promotion under the sanctioning of the Cambodian Boxing Federation, responsible for sanctioning all boxing and Kun Khmer events in the country, in direct contrast to the situation in neighbouring Thailand. Main article: Mixed martial arts in Canada For many years, professional MMA competitions were illegal in Canada. Section 83(2) of the Canadian Criminal Code deemed that only boxing matches where only fists are used are considered legal. [250] [251] However most provinces regulated it by a provincial athletic commission (skirting S. 83(2) by classifying MMA as "mixed boxing"), [252] such as the provinces of Manitoba, Ontario, [253] Nova Scotia, Quebec, and Northwest Territories. The legality of MMA in the provinces of Alberta, British Columbia, and New Brunswick varies depending on the municipality. [254] [255] Professional MMA competitions remain illegal in the Canadian provinces of Newfoundland and Labrador, Prince Edward Island, Saskatchewan, Yukon, and Nunavut because it is not regulated by an athletic commission. Canada formally decriminalized mixed martial arts with a vote on Bill S-209 on June 5, 2013. The bill formally gives provinces the power to create athletic commissions to regulate and sanction professional mixed martial arts bouts. [71] Bill S-209 does not in and of itself make MMA legal across Canada; it allows provinces to make it legal on a province by province basis. [252] China[ edit ] The first professional mixed martial arts promotion was Art of War Fighting Championship which was founded by Andy Pi , a Chinese American BJJ practitioner. [256] After defeating Xu Xiaodong in a televised MMA match he noticed the lack of formal rules, medical care or oversight which could have led to MMA and BJJ being banned in China so he came up with an idea to create a regulated professional MMA promotion. [256] When setting up the promotion, Pi sought out grapplers to compete in it. He met Zhao Xuejun , a renowned Sanda coach who convinced Pi that he did not need to seek out pure grapplers and that Sanda fighters were just as capable of competing in MMA. [257] Art of War I was held at the Beijing Sports University on November 6, 2005, making it the first professional MMA event to be held in China. [258] In 2011, the Ranik Ultimate Fighting Federation ( RUFF ) hosted the first MMA event in Shanghai sanctioned by China's governing body for combat sports, the Wushu Sports Management Center of the General Administration of Sport in China. RUFF formally crowned the first Chinese national MMA champions in 2013 with each champion receiving 1,000,000 RMB in prize money. [259] Other MMA promotions in China include the 'Real Fight Championship', which has produced three events in Henan and Beijing . Denmark[ edit ] In Denmark, Mixed Martial Arts may be practiced but is not an official or legally regulated sport. On November 11, 2012, the voluntary Danish Mixed Martial Arts Federation held its first official general assembly in Odense, Denmark. There the DMMAF was officially founded and a board was elected headed up by President Claus Larsen. The Federation was publicly launched on Friday November 24, inviting Danish MMA organizations, gyms and academies to sign up as members. The DMMAF is working towards recognition under the Danish Sports Federation, Dansk Idræts Forbund. On November 25 the DMMAF's application to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation was approved. [260] [261] France[ edit ] There remains political opposition to MMA in France and full contact MMA competition was banned until 2020. [262] [263] [264] All bouts on French soil recorded as Mixed Martial Arts were in fact held under Pancrase rules and other variants (pankration, pempo, pankido). [265] [266] These bouts involved no striking on the ground as it was illegal in the country. The Commission nationale de Mixed Martial Arts (CNMMA) was founded as a non-profit organization for the development of MMA in 2009. The CNMMA had worked over four years to put an educational structure in place, including a technical system for the safe progression from grass-roots level, all the way up to the top professional level. [267] Comprising 11 regional leagues working under regional technical advisers and teams, [267] the CNMMA joined the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF) in March 2013 as the Commission française de Mixed Martial Arts (CFMMA). [268] [269] In 2012, CFMMA president Bertrand Amoussou ascended to the position of President of the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation.[ citation needed ] On June 24, 2019, Roxana Maracineanu , France's minister of sport announced the legalization of mixed martial arts as of January 1, 2020. [270] On October 8, 2020, the country's first officially regulated MMA event, dubbed the Mixed Martial Arts Grand Prix, went ahead in Vitry-sur-Seine. [271] India[ edit ] The Indian Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has not recognized Mixed Martial Arts as a sport in India. There exist multiple bodies of association and federations which offer services to organize Mixed martial Arts events across India. Among them are MMAFI-Mixed Martial Arts Federation,India, All India Mixed Martial Arts Association (AIMMAA) and MMA India – National Sports Federation. [272] Mixed Martial Arts events have been organized in India by Super Fight League , [273] Brave Combat Federation , [274] and Kumite 1 League . [275] There is another emerging national MMA promotion in India called the 'Soul of Warriors MMA Fight Night'. The Irish Martial Arts Commission, which is recognized by the Irish Sports Council , does not include MMA among its recognized martial arts. [276] [277] The Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport does not recognise MMA as a sport. [278] [ failed verification ] UFC Fight Night 46 , featuring Conor McGregor , was held in Dublin in 2014. Mixed Martial Arts Federation Ireland (MMAFI), intended as a federation for amateur MMA clubs, gained observer status at IMMAF in June 2012. [279] MMAFI had a meeting in March 2013 with the Northern Ireland sports minister , Carál Ní Chuilín about the prospect of getting recognition from Sport Northern Ireland . [279] Main article: Mixed martial arts in Japan MMA competition has been legal in Japan since at least the mid-1980s, when Pancrase fights began to be held. There are several MMA-related organizations, including RIZIN FF , DEEP , Pancrase, [280] Shooto , [281] Fighting Nexus, [282] Deep, [283] Grachan [284] and ZST . [285] [286] Malaysia[ edit ] In July 2013 the Malaysia Mixed Martial Arts Association (MASMMAA) was formally announced as the official national governing body for MMA in Malaysia, ahead of its formation in December 2013. MASMMAA is registered under the Malaysian Sports Development Act 1997 and recognized by the Commissioner of Sports, under the auspices of the office of the Youth & Sports Ministry. The federation comprises representatives of ten states out of fourteen in Malaysia. MASMMAA became affiliated to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation in April 2014. [287] [288] [289] Nepal[ edit ] The first amateur MMA match was held in Kathmandu, Nepal, on July 8, 2022. [290] Nepal's own MMA promotion Nepal Warriors Championship, was founded in 2023. [291] On June 16, 2023, they staged the first-ever professional fight. [292] [293] [294] Norway[ edit ] In Norway, professional MMA is illegal. [295] Since 1981, all sports involving knockouts as a method of victory were banned but it was lifted for professional boxing in late 2014. [296] Norwegian MMA fighters must therefore travel abroad to compete. The Norwegian MMA Federation (NMMAF) was elected as a full member of the International MMA Federation (IMMAF) on April 22, 2012, [297] representing 49 member gyms across Norway. [298] In 2012 the "Merkekamper" concept was introduced by the NMMAF, with government sanctioning, which enables member MMA gyms to hold events with sparring matches, but governed by strict rules concerning how hard a fighter is permitted to strike. [299] [300] On April 5, 2019, MMA was recognized by and welcomed into the Norwegian Martial Arts Federation ( Norwegian Kampsportforbundet), a federation of the Norwegian Olympic and Paralympic Committee and Confederation of Sports (NIF) with the goal of growing the amateur sport. [301] Pakistan[ edit ] In Pakistan, Mixed Martial Arts Pakistan organizes MMA events. The organization was founded in 2007 by veteran Pakistani MMA fighter Bashir Ahmad for promotion of MMA in Pakistan. Portugal[ edit ] The FMMAP is recognized by the Portuguese government as a non-profit sports federation and oversees Amateur MMA competition and coaching nationally. Based in Vila do Conde, the Federação de Mixed Martial Arts de Portugal (FMMAP) was founded as a collaborative effort between six existing non-profit organizations in 2012, as Portugal's first dedicated MMA Federation. This is in line with government requirements for all sport federations in Portugal which stipulates that they consist of at least three associated, non-profit groups. The composite FMMAP organisations are all involved in the coaching and promotion of MMA with a shared goal for the amateur sport, but come from various martial arts that include karate, kickboxing, Muay Thai, pankration athlima, mixed martial arts, Jeet Kune Do, freestyle martial arts, Brazilian jiu-jitsu and wrestling. Affiliated groups at launch were AAMU – Associação Artes Marciais, Associação de Artes Marciais e Desportos de Combate (Açores), Associação Areagon (Chaves City), Associação Mirandelense de Artes Orientais (Mirandela City), Associação Portuguesa de Ciências de Combate/JKD Unlimited Portugal (Lisbon City), KMD MMA system (Porto City), Barcelos Gym (Barcelos City). The FMMAP is affiliated to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF). [302] [303] [304] Romania[ edit ] The Romanian Mixed Martial Arts Federation (RMMAF) was established in 2012 as a legal non-profit federation under the Ministry of Youth and Sport in Romania. The Federation was formed by the board of MMA organization AGON and backed by a broad representation of the Romanian MMA community, including around twenty MMA clubs and non-profit MMA organizations around the country. Based in Bucharest, Romania AGON club was founded in its present legal form in June 2012, following a long period of time of acting under different other organisations, with Gheorghe Stanciu elected as its president. The RMMAF is affiliated to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF). [305] [306] [307] [308]
Headquarters of the Union Cycliste Internationale in Switzerland. Cyclists form associations, both for specific interests (trails development, road maintenance, bike maintenance, urban design, racing clubs, touring clubs, etc.) and for more global goals ( energy conservation , pollution reduction, promotion of fitness). Some bicycle clubs and national associations became prominent advocates for improvements to roads and highways. In the United States, the League of American Wheelmen lobbied for the improvement of roads in the last part of the 19th century, founding and leading the national Good Roads Movement . Their model for political organization, as well as the paved roads for which they argued, facilitated the growth of the automobile. In Europe, the European Cyclists' Federation represents around 70 local, regional and national civil society organisations across more than 40 countries that work to promote cycling as a mode of transport and leisure. [42] As a sport, cycling is governed internationally by the Union Cycliste Internationale in Switzerland, USA Cycling (merged with the United States Cycling Federation in 1995) in the United States, (for upright bicycles ) and by the International Human Powered Vehicle Association (for other HPVs, or human-powered vehicles). Cycling for transport and touring is promoted on a European level by the European Cyclists' Federation , with associated members from Great Britain, Japan and elsewhere. Regular conferences on cycling as transport are held under the auspices of Velo City ; global conferences are coordinated by Velo Mondial. [43] Cycling as a means of transportation[ edit ] Cycling is widely regarded as an effective and efficient mode of transportation [44] [45] optimal for short to moderate distances. Bicycles provide numerous possible benefits in comparison with motor vehicles, including the sustained physical exercise involved in cycling, easier parking, increased maneuverability, and access to roads, bike paths and rural trails. Cycling also offers a reduced consumption of fossil fuels , less air and noise pollution , reduced greenhouse gas emissions, [46] and greatly reduced traffic congestion . [35] These have a lower financial cost for users as well as for society at large (negligible damage to roads, less road area required). By fitting bicycle racks on the front of buses, transit agencies can significantly increase the areas they can serve. [47] Among the disadvantages of cycling are the requirement of bicycles (excepting tricycles or quadricycles) for the rider to have certain level of basic skill to remain upright, the reduced protection in crashes in comparison to motor vehicles, [48] often longer travel time (except in densely populated areas), vulnerability to weather conditions, difficulty in transporting passengers, and the fact that a basic level of fitness is required for cycling moderate to long distances. Health effects[ edit ] Cycling provides a variety of health benefits [49] [50] and reduces the risk of cancers, heart disease, and diabetes that are prevalent in sedentary lifestyles. [51] [35] Cycling on stationary bikes have also been used as part of rehabilitation for lower limb injuries, particularly after hip surgery. [52] Individuals who cycle regularly have also reported mental health improvements, including less perceived stress and better vitality. [53] The health benefits of cycling outweigh the risks, when cycling is compared to a sedentary lifestyle. A Dutch study found that cycling can extend lifespans by up to 14 months, but the risks equated to a reduced lifespan of 40 days or less. [54] Mortality rate reduction was found to be directly correlated to the average time spent cycling, totaling to approximately 6500 deaths prevented by cycling. [55] Cycling in the Netherlands is often safer than in other parts of the world, so the risk-benefit ratio will be different in other regions. [56] Overall, benefits of cycling or walking have been shown to exceed risks by ratios of 9:1 to 96:1 when compared with no exercise at all, including a wide variety of physical and mental outcomes. [57] [58] [59] Exercise[ edit ] Heavily equipped London cyclist: specialist cycle clothing, pollution mask, dark glasses and helmet. The physical exercise gained from cycling is generally linked with increased health and well-being. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), physical inactivity is second only to tobacco smoking as a health risk in developed countries, [51] and is associated with 20-30% increased risk of various cancers, heart disease, and diabetes [60] and tens of billions of dollars of healthcare costs. [61] The WHO's 2009 report [51] suggests that increasing physical activity is a public health "best buy", and that cycling is a "highly suitable activity" for this purpose. The charity Sustrans reports that investment in cycling provision can give a 20:1 return from health and other benefits. [62] It has been estimated that, on average, approximately 20 life-years are gained from the health benefits of road bicycling for every life-year lost through injury. [63] Bicycles are often used by people seeking to improve their fitness and cardiovascular health. Recent studies on the use of cycling for commutes have shown that it reduces the risk of cardiovascular outcomes by 11%, with slightly more risk reduction in women than in men. [64] [65] In addition, cycling is especially helpful for those with arthritis of the lower limbs who are unable to pursue sports that cause impact to the knees and other joints. Since cycling can be used for the practical purpose of transportation, there can be less need for self-discipline to exercise. Cycling while seated is a relatively non- weight bearing exercise that, like swimming , does little to promote bone density. [66] Cycling up and out of the saddle, on the other hand, does a better job by transferring more of the rider's body weight to the legs. However, excessive cycling while standing can cause knee damage [67] It used to be thought that cycling while standing was less energy efficient, but recent research has proven this not to be true. Other than air resistance, there is no wasted energy from cycling while standing, if it is done correctly. [68] Cycling on a stationary cycle is frequently advocated as a suitable exercise for rehabilitation, particularly for lower limb injury, owing to the low impact which it has on the joints. In particular, cycling is commonly used within knee rehabilitation programs, to strengthen the quadriceps muscles with minimal stress on the knee ligaments. [69] Further stress of the knee can be relieved by changing seat heights and pedal position to improve the rehabilitation. Cycling is also used for rehabilitation after hip surgery to manage soft-tissue healing, control swelling and pain, and allow a larger range of motion to the nearby muscles earlier during recovery. [52] As a result, many institutions have established a rehabilitation protocol that involves stationary cycling as part of the recovery process. One such protocol offered by Mayo Clinic recommends 2–4 weeks of cycling on an upright stationary bike following hip arthroscopy , starting from 5 minutes per session and slowly increasing to 30 minutes per session. [70] The goal of these sessions are to reduce joint inflammation and maintain the widest range of motion possible with limited pain. Bike at Prins Hendrikkade , Amsterdam . As a response to the increased global sedentary lifestyles and consequent overweight and obesity , one response that has been adopted by many organizations concerned with health and environment is the promotion of Active travel , which seeks to promote walking and cycling as safe and attractive alternatives to motorized transport. Given that many journeys are for relatively short distances, there is considerable scope to replace car use with walking or cycling, though in many settings this may require some infrastructure modification, particularly to attract the less experienced and confident. An Italian study assessed the impact of cycling for commute on major non-communicable diseases and public healthcare costs. Using a health economic assessment model, the study found a lower incidence of type 2 diabetes, acute myocardial infarction, and stroke in individuals that cycled compared to those that did not actively commute. This model estimated that public healthcare costs would reduce by 5% over a 10-year period. [71] Mental health[ edit ] The effects of cycling on overall mental health have often been studied. A European study surveying participants from seven cities about self-perceived health based on primary modes of transportation reported favorable results in the bicycle use population. [53] The bicycle use group reported predominantly good self-perceived health, less perceived stress, better mental health, better vitality, and less loneliness. The study attributed these results to possible economic benefits and senses of both independence and identity as a member of a cyclist community. An English study recruiting non-cyclist older adults aged 50 to 83 to participate as either conventional pedal bike cyclists, electrically assisted e-bike cyclists, or a non-cyclist control group in outdoor trails measured cognitive function through executive function, spatial reasoning, and memory tests and well-being through questionnaires. [73] The study did not find significant differences in spatial reasoning or memory tests. It did, however, find that both cyclists groups had improved executive function and well-being, both with greater improvement in the e-bike group. This suggested that non-physical factors of cycling such as independence, engagement with the outdoor environment, and mobility play a greater role in improving mental health. A 15-month randomized controlled trial in the U.S. examined the impact of self-paced cycling on cognitive function in institutionalized older adults without cognitive impairment. [74] Researchers used three cognitive assessments: Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Fuld object memory evaluation, and symbol digit modality test. The study found that long-term cycling for at least 15 minutes per day in older adults without cognitive impairment had a protective effect on cognition and attention. Cycling has also been shown to be effective adjunct therapy in certain mental health conditions. [75] [76] Further information: Bicycle safety Virgin Mary venerated as the holy protector of bicyclists on the roads of the mountainous Basque Country. Cycling suffers from a perception that it is unsafe. [77] [78] This perception is not always backed by hard numbers, because of under reporting of crashes and lack of bicycle use data (amount of cycling, kilometers cycled) which make it hard to assess the risk and monitor changes in risks. [79] In the UK, fatality rates per mile or kilometre are slightly less than those for walking. [80] In the US, bicycling fatality rates are less than 2/3 of those walking the same distance. [81] [82] However, in the UK for example the fatality and serious injury rates per hour of travel are just over double for cycling than those for walking. [80] Despite the risk factors associated with bicycling, cyclists have a lower overall mortality rate when compared to other groups. A Danish study in 2000 found that even after adjustment for other risk factors, including leisure time physical activity, those who did not cycle to work experienced a 39% higher mortality rate than those who did. [83] Injuries (to cyclists, from cycling) can be divided into two types:
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Recreational activity and sport using snow skis For other uses, see Skiing (disambiguation) , Water skiing , and Skier (cricket) . Alpine skiers Skiing is the use of skis to glide on snow . Variations of purpose include basic transport, a recreational activity, or a competitive winter sport . Many types of competitive skiing events are recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC), and the International Ski and Snowboard Federation (FIS). History Main article: History of skiing Video demonstration of a variety of ski techniques used in the 1940s. Skiing has a history of almost five millennia. [1] Although modern skiing has evolved from beginnings in Scandinavia , it may have been practiced more than 100 centuries ago in what is now China , according to an interpretation of ancient paintings. [2] [3] However, this continues to be debated. [4] [5] The word "ski" comes from the Old Norse word "skíð" which means to "split piece of wood or firewood". [6] Asymmetrical skis were used in northern Finland and Sweden until at least the late 19th century. On one foot, the skier wore a long straight non-arching ski for sliding, and a shorter ski was worn on the other foot for kicking. The underside of the short ski was either plain or covered with animal skin to aid this use, while the long ski supporting the weight of the skier was treated with animal fat in a similar manner to modern ski waxing . Early skiers used one long pole or spear. The first description of a skier with two ski poles dates to 1741. [7] Troops in continental Europe were equipped with skis by 1747. [8] Skiing was primarily used for transport until the mid-19th century but, since then, it has also become a recreation and sport. [9] Military ski races were held in Norway during the 18th century, [10] and ski warfare was studied in the late 18th century. [11] As equipment evolved and ski lifts were developed during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, two main genres of skiing emerged— Alpine (downhill) skiing and Nordic skiing . The main difference between the two is the type of ski binding (the way in which the ski boots are attached to the skis). Types Main article: Alpine skiing Also called "downhill skiing", Alpine skiing typically takes place on a piste at a ski resort . It is characterized by fixed-heel bindings that attach at both the toe and the heel of the skier's boot. Ski lifts , including chairlifts , bring skiers up the slope. Backcountry skiing can be accessed by helicopter , snowcat , hiking and snowmobile . Facilities at resorts can include night skiing , après-ski , and glade skiing under the supervision of the ski patrol and the ski school . Alpine skiing branched off from the older Nordic type of skiing around the 1920s when the advent of ski lifts meant that it was no longer necessary to climb back uphill. Alpine equipment has specialized to the point where it can now only be used with the help of lifts. Alpine Touring setups use specialized bindings which are switchable between locked and free-heel modes. Climbing skins are temporarily attached to the bottom of alpine skis to give them traction on snow. This permits Nordic style uphill and back-country travel on alpine skis. For downhill travel, the heels are locked and the skins are removed. Nordic Main article: Nordic skiing The Nordic disciplines include cross-country skiing and ski jumping , which both use bindings that attach at the toes of the skier's boots but not at the heels. Cross-country skiing may be practiced on groomed trails or in undeveloped backcountry areas. Ski jumping is practiced in certain areas that are reserved exclusively for ski jumping. Telemark Main article: Telemark skiing Telemark skiing is a ski turning technique and FIS-sanctioned discipline, which is named after the Telemark region of Norway. It uses equipment similar to Nordic skiing, where the ski bindings are attached only at the toes of the ski boots, allowing the skier's heel to be raised throughout the turn. However, the skis themselves are often the same width as Alpine skis. Competition The following disciplines are sanctioned by the FIS. Many have their own world cups and are included in the Winter Olympic Games . Cross-country – Encompasses a variety of formats for cross-country skiing races over courses of varying lengths. Races occur on homologated , groomed courses designed to support classic (in-track) and free-style events, where skate skiing may be employed. The main competitions are the FIS Cross-Country World Cup and the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships (held only in odd-numbered years), and various cross-country skiing events have been incorporated into the Winter Olympics since its inception in 1924 . The discipline also incorporates: cross-country ski marathon events, sanctioned by the Worldloppet Ski Federation ; cross-country ski-orienteering events, sanctioned by the International Orienteering Federation ; and biathlon , a combination of cross-country skiing and rifle shooting . Paralympic cross-country skiing and paralympic biathlon are both included in the Winter Paralympic Games . Ski jumping – Contested at the FIS Ski Jumping World Cup , the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships (odd-numbered years only), the FIS Ski Jumping Grand Prix , and the FIS Ski Flying World Championships . Ski jumping has also been a regular Olympic discipline at every Winter Games since 1924. Freeriding skiing – This category of skiing includes any practice of the sport on non-groomed terrain. Nordic combined – A combination of cross-country skiing and ski jumping, this discipline is contested at the FIS Nordic Combined World Cup , the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships (odd-numbered years only), and at the Winter Olympics. Alpine skiing – Includes downhill , slalom , giant slalom , super giant slalom (super-G), and para-alpine events. There are also combined events where the competitors must complete one run of each event, for example; the Super Combined event consists of one run of super-G and one run of slalom skiing. The dual slalom event, where racers ski head-to-head, was invented in 1941 and has been a competitive event since 1960. [12] Alpine skiing is contested at the FIS Alpine Ski World Cup , the FIS Alpine World Ski Championships (held only in odd-numbered years), and the Winter Olympics. Para-alpine skiing is contested at the World Para Alpine Skiing Championships (odd-numbered years) and the Winter Paralympics. Speed skiing – Dating from 1898, with official records beginning in 1932 with an 89-mile-per-hour (143 km/h) run by Leo Gasperi, this became an FIS discipline in the 1960s. It is contested at the FIS Speed Ski World Cup, and was demonstrated at the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville . [13] Freestyle skiing – Includes mogul skiing , aerials , ski cross , half-pipe , and slopestyle . The main freestyle competitions are the FIS Freestyle Skiing World Cup and the FIS Freestyle World Ski Championships (held in odd-numbered years). The discipline was first demonstrated at the 1988 Winter Olympics and was added to the Olympic programme in 1992. It became an Olympic sport in the 2014 Sochi Olympic games when the Slope-style and Half pipe events were introduced. [14] Snowboarding – Disciplines include slopestyle, cross , half-pipe, alpine , parallel slalom, and parallel giant slalom. The main competitions are the annual FIS Snowboard World Cup and the FIS Snowboard World Championships (held in odd-numbered years). Snowboarding debuted as an Olympic discipline in 1998 (as part of the Alpine skiing programme) and was contested as a separate discipline at the 2018 Winter Olympics . Skiboarding – Using a snowboard in conjunction with standard ski boots , this discipline is essentially a combination of skiing and snowboarding. Various skiboarding competitions have been tried over recent years, including the Skiboard Triple Challenge, United Skiboard Series, European Skiboard Cup, Skiboard World Cup, and the US Skiboard Open. Telemark – Named after the Telemark region of Norway, this discipline combines elements of Alpine and Nordic skiing. A relatively new competitive sport, Telemark racing is contested at the FIS Telemark World Cup and the FIS Telemark World Championships. Grass skiing – Originally developed as an alpine skiing training method, skiing on grass has become established as a skiing discipline in its own right. It is contested at the FIS Grass Skiing World Cup and the FIS Grass Ski World Championships. Equipment Four groups of different ski types, from left to right:1. Non-sidecut: cross-country, telemark and mountaineering 2. Parabolic3. Twin-tip4. Powder Equipment used in skiing includes: Skis , which may have skins applied or be textured for uphill traction or wax applied for minimizing sliding friction. Twin-tip skis are also designed to move forwards or backwards.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Snow sport involving a single board Snowboarding A snowboarder making a turn in fresh snow First played 2014 Snowboarding is a recreational and competitive activity that involves descending a snow-covered surface while standing on a snowboard that is almost always attached to a rider's feet. It features in the Winter Olympic Games and Winter Paralympic Games . Snowboarding was developed in the United States , inspired by skateboarding , sledding , surfing , and skiing . It became popular around the world and was introduced as a Winter Olympic Sport at Nagano in 1998 [1] and featured in the Winter Paralympics at Sochi in 2014 . [2] As of 2015 [update] , its popularity (as measured by equipment sales) in the United States peaked in 2007 and has been in a decline since. [3] [4] Snowboarder riding off of a cornice Freeride snowboarding, in areas off of the main trails The first snowboards were developed in 1965 when Sherman Poppen, an engineer in Muskegon, Michigan , invented a toy for his daughters by fastening two skis together and attaching a rope to one end so he would have some control as they stood on the board and glided downhill. Dubbed the " snurfer " (combining snow and surfer) by his wife Nancy, the toy proved so popular among his daughters' friends that Poppen licensed the idea to a manufacturer, Brunswick Corporation , that sold about a million snurfers over the next decade. [5] And, in 1966 alone, over half a million snurfers were sold. [6] Modern snowboarding was pioneered by Tom Sims and Jake Burton Carpenter , who both contributed significant innovations and started influential companies. In February 1968, Poppen organized the first snurfing competition at a Michigan ski resort that attracted enthusiasts from all over the country. [7] One of those early pioneers was Tom Sims , a devotee of skateboarding (a sport born in the 1950s when kids attached roller skate wheels to small boards that they steered by shifting their weight). In the 1960s, as an eighth grader in Haddonfield, New Jersey, Sims crafted a snowboard in his school shop class by gluing carpet to the top of a piece of wood and attaching aluminum sheeting to the bottom. [8] He produced commercial snowboards in the mid-70s including the Skiboard (also known as the Lonnie Toft flying banana) a molded polyethylene bottom with a Lonnie Toft signature skateboard deck attached to the top. [9] [10] Others experimented with board-on-snow configurations at this time, including Welsh skateboard enthusiasts Jon Roberts and Pete Matthews developed their own snowboards to use at their local dry ski slope . [11] [12] Also during this same period, in 1977, Jake Burton Carpenter , a Vermont native who had enjoyed snurfing since the age of 14, impressed the crowd at a Michigan snurfing competition with bindings he had designed to secure his feet to the board. That same year, he founded Burton Snowboards in Londonderry, Vermont . [13] The "snowboards" were made of wooden planks that were flexible and had water ski foot traps. Very few people picked up snowboarding because the price of the board was considered too high at $38 and were not allowed on many ski hills, but eventually Burton would become the biggest snowboarding company in the business. [14] Burton's early designs for boards with bindings became the dominant features in snowboarding. The first competitions to offer prize money were the National Snurfing Championship, held at Muskegon State Park in Muskegon, Michigan . [15] In 1979, Jake Burton Carpenter came from Vermont to compete with a snowboard of his own design. There were protests about Jake entering with a non-snurfer board. Paul Graves, and others, advocated that Jake be allowed to race. A "modified" "Open" division was created and won by Jake as the sole entrant. That race was considered the first competition for snowboarding and is the start of what became competitive snowboarding. Ken Kampenga, John Asmussen and Jim Trim placed first, second and third respectively in the Standard competition with best two combined times of 24.71, 25.02 and 25.41; and Jake Carpenter won prize money as the sole entrant in the "open" division with a time of 26.35. [16] In 1980 the event moved to Pando Winter Sports Park near Grand Rapids, Michigan because of a lack of snow that year at the original venue. [17] [18] In the early 1980s, Aleksey Ostatnigrosh and Alexei Melnikov, two Snurfers from the Soviet Union, patented design changes to the Snurfer to allow jumping by attaching a bungee cord, a single footed binding to the Snurfer tail, and a two-foot binding design for improved control. [19] [20] [21] As snowboarding became more popular in the 1970s and 1980s, pioneers such as Dimitrije Milovich (founder of Winterstick out of Salt Lake City, UT), Jake Burton Carpenter (founder of Burton Snowboards from Londonderry, Vermont), Tom Sims (founder of Sims Snowboards ), David Kemper (founder of Kemper Snowboards ) and Mike Olson (founder of Gnu Snowboards ) came up with new designs for boards and mechanisms that slowly developed into the snowboards and other related equipment. [22] From these developments, modern snowboarding equipment usually consists of a snowboard with specialized bindings [23] and boots. [24] In April 1981, the "King of the Mountain" Snowboard competition was held at Ski Cooper in Colorado. [25] Tom Sims along with an assortment of other snowboarders of the time were present. [26] One entrant showed up on a homemade snowboard with a formica bottom that turned out to not slide so well on the snow. In 1982, the first USA National Snowboard race was held near Woodstock, Vermont , at Suicide Six . The race, organized by Graves, was won by Burton's first team rider Doug Bouton. [27] In 1983, the first World Championship halfpipe competition was held at Soda Springs , California. Tom Sims , founder of Sims Snowboards, organized the event with the help of Mike Chantry, a snowboard instructor at Soda Springs. [28] In 1985, the first World Cup was held in Zürs , Austria, [29] further cementing snowboarding's recognition as an official international competitive sport. In 1990, the International Snowboard Federation (ISF) was founded to provide universal contest regulations. [30] In addition, the United States of America Snowboard Association (USASA) provides instructing guidelines and runs snowboard competitions in the U.S. today, high-profile snowboarding events like the Winter X Games , Air & Style , US Open, Olympic Games and other events are broadcast worldwide. Many alpine resorts have terrain parks . At the 1998 Winter Olympic Games in Nagano, Japan, Snowboarding became an official Olympic event. [31] France's Karine Ruby was the first ever to win an Olympic gold medal for Woman's Snowboarding at the 1998 Olympics, while Canadian Ross Rebagliati [32] was the first ever to win an Olympic gold medal for Men's Snowboarding. Initially, ski areas adopted the sport at a much slower pace than the winter sports public. Indeed, for many years, there was animosity between skiers and snowboarders, which led to an ongoing skier vs snowboarder feud. [33] Early snowboards were banned from the slopes by park officials. For several years snowboarders would have to take a small skills assessment prior to being allowed to ride the chairlifts. It was thought that an unskilled snowboarder would wipe the snow off the mountain. In 1985, only seven percent of U.S. ski areas allowed snowboarding, [34] with a similar proportion in Europe. As equipment and skills improved, gradually snowboarding became more accepted. In 1990, most major ski areas had separate slopes for snowboarders. Now, approximately 97% of all ski areas in North America and Europe allow snowboarding, and more than half have jumps, rails and half pipes. In 2004, snowboarding had 6.6 million active participants. [35] An industry spokesman said that "twelve year-olds are out-riding adults." The same article said that most snowboarders are 18–24 years old and that women constitute 25% of participants. There were 8.2 million snowboarders in the US and Canada for the 2009–2010 season. There was a 10% increase over the previous season, accounting for more than 30% of all snow sports participants. [36] On 2 May 2012, the International Paralympic Committee announced that adaptive snowboarding (dubbed "para-snowboarding") would debut as a men's and women's medal event in the 2014 Paralympic Winter Games taking place in Sochi, Russia. [37] Styles[ edit ] Since snowboarding's inception as an established winter sport, it has developed various styles, each with its own specialized equipment and technique. The most common styles today are: freeride, freestyle, and freecarve/race. These styles are used for both recreational and professional snowboarding. While each style is unique, there is overlap between them. Main article: Jibbing "Jibbing" is the term for technical riding on non-standard surfaces. The word "jib" is both a noun and a verb, depending on the usage of the word. As a noun: a jib includes metal rails, boxes, benches, concrete ledges, walls, vehicles, rocks and logs. As a verb: to jib is referring to the action of jumping, sliding, or riding on top of objects other than snow. [38] It is directly influenced by grinding a skateboard. Jibbing is a freestyle snowboarding technique of riding. Typically jibbing occurs in a snowboard resort park but can also be done in urban environments. Freeriding snowboarding Main article: Freeriding (sport) Freeriding is a style without a set of governing rules or set course, typically on natural, un-groomed terrain. The basic allows for various snowboarding styles in a fluid motion and spontaneity through naturally rugged terrain. It can be like freestyle with the exception that no man-made features are utilized. See also Backcountry snowboarding . Freestyle snowboarding Freestyle[ edit ] Freestyle snowboarding is any riding that includes performing tricks. In freestyle, the rider utilizes natural and man-made features such as rails, jumps, boxes, and innumerable others to perform tricks. It is a popular all-inclusive concept that distinguishes the creative aspects of snowboarding, in contrast to a style like alpine snowboarding. Alpine snowboarding[ edit ] An Alpine snowboarder executes a heel-side carved turn , the typical style in alpine snowboarding. Video of a snowboarder practicing carving on a hard slope, equipped with a boardercross board and hard boots. Alpine snowboarding is a discipline within the sport of snowboarding. It is practiced on groomed pistes . It has been an Olympic event since 1998 . Freestyle snowboarder films for movie on handrail in Utah Sometimes called freecarving or hardbooting (due to the equipment used), this discipline usually takes place on hard packed snow or groomed runs (although it can be practiced in any and all conditions) and focuses on carving linked turns, much like surfing or longboarding, and is seen as superior to other disciplines in many Europeans countries.[ according to whom? ] Little or no jumping takes place in this discipline. Alpine Snowboarding consists of a small portion of the general snowboard population, that has a well connected social community and its own specific board manufacturers, most situated in Europe. Alpine Snowboard equipment includes a ski-like hardshell boot and plate binding system with a true directional snowboard that is stiffer and narrower to manage linking turns with greater forces and speed. [39] Shaped skis can thank these "freecarve" snowboards for the cutting-edge technology leading to their creation. [40] A skilled alpine snowboarder can link numerous turns into a run placing their body very close to the ground each turn, similar to a motocross turn or waterski carve. Depending on factors including stiffness, turning radius and personality this can be done slowly or fast. Carvers make perfect half-circles out of each turn, changing edges when the snowboard is perpendicular to the fall line and starting every turn on the downhill edge. Carving on a snowboard is like riding a roller coaster, because the board will lock into a turn radius and provide what feels like multiple Gs of acceleration. [41] Alpine snowboarding shares more visual similarities with skiing equipment than it does with snowboarding equipment. [42] Compared to freestyle snowboarding gear: [43] boards are narrower, longer, and stiffer to improve carving performance boots are made from a hard plastic shell, making it flex differently from a regular snowboard boot and is designed differently to ski boots although they look similar. bindings have a bail or step-in design and are sometimes placed on suspension plates to provide a layer of isolation between an alpine snowboarder and the board, to decrease the level of vibrations felt by the rider, creating a better overall experience when carving, and to give extra weight to the board among other uses. Main article: Slopestyle Competitors perform tricks while descending a course, moving around, over, across, up, or down terrain features. The course is full of obstacles including boxes, rails, jumps, jibs, or anything else the board or rider can slide across. Slopestyle is a judged event and winning a slopestyle contest usually comes from successfully executing the most difficult line in the terrain park while having a smooth flowing line of difficult, mistake-free tricks performed on the obstacles. However, overall impression and style can play a factor in winning a slopestyle contest and the rider who lands the hardest tricks will not always win over the rider who lands easier tricks on more difficult paths. Sebastien Toutant at the downtown Québec big air competition Snowboarder in the halfpipe Big air competitions are contests where riders perform tricks after launching off a man-made jump built specifically for the event. [44] Competitors perform tricks in the air, aiming to attain sizable height and distance, all while securing a clean landing. Many competitions also require the rider to do a complex trick. Not all competitions call for a trick to win the gold; some intermittent competitions are based solely on height and distance of the launch of the snowboarder. Some competitions also require the rider to do a specific trick to win the major prize. [45] One of the first snowboard competitions where Travis Rice attempted and landed a "double back flip backside 180" took place at the 2006 Red Bull Gap Session. [46] Main article: Half-pipe The half-pipe is a semi-circular ditch dug into the mountain or purpose-built ramp made up of snow, with walls between 8 and 23 feet (7.0 m). Competitors perform tricks while going from one side to the other and while in the air above the sides of the pipe. Main article: Snowboard cross Snowboard cross, also known as "boardercross", "boarder X", or "snowboard X", and commonly abbreviated as "SBX", or just "BX", is a snowboarding discipline consisting of several (typically 4 to 6) riders racing head-to-head down a course with jumps, berms and other obstacles constructed out of snow. Snowboard cross began in the 1980s, earning its place as an official Winter Olympic event in the 2006 Turin games. Unlike other snowboard racing disciplines such as parallel giant slalom, competitors race on a single course together. Main article: Snowboard racing In snowboard racing, riders must complete a downhill course constructed of a series of turning color indicators (gates) placed in the snow at prescribed distances apart. A gate consists of a tall pole and a short pole, connected by a triangular panel. The racer must pass around the short side of the gate, passing the long side of the gate doesn't count. There are 3 main formats used in snowboard racing including single person, parallel courses or multiple people on the course at the same time (SBX). Snowboarding contests are held throughout the world and range from grassroots competitions to professional events contested worldwide. 2016 Winter X Games in Aspen, Colorado. Some of the larger snowboarding contests include: the European Air & Style , the Japanese X-Trail Jam , Burton Global Open Series, Shakedown , FIS World Championships , the annual FIS World Cup , the Winter X Games , Freeride World Tour and the Winter Dew Tour . Snowboarding has been a Winter Olympic sport since 1998 Winter Olympics . Since its inauguration, Olympic snowboarding has seen many additions and removals of events. During the 2018 Winter Olympics , snowboarding events contested included big air, halfpipe, parallel giant slalom, slopestyle and snowboard cross. Snowboarder Magazine 's Superpark [47] event was created in 1996. Over 150 of the World's top pros are invited to advance freestyle snowboarding on the most progressive terrain parks. [48] Part of the snowboarding approach is to ensure maximum fun, friendship and event quality. Reflecting this perspective of snowboarding, you can find "Anti Contests" which [49] are an important part of its identity including The Holy Oly Revival [50] at The Summit at Snoqualmie , The Nate Chute Hawaiian Classic at Whitefish, the original anti-contest, the World Quarterpipe Championships and the Grenade Games. The United States of America Snowboarding and Freeski Association (USASA) features grassroots-level competitions designed to be a stepping stone for aspiring athletes looking to progress up the competition pipeline. The USASA consists of 36 regional series in which anyone can compete against athletes in a multitude of classes. For snowboarding, USASA contests regional events in six primary disciplines (Slalom, Giant Slalom, Slopestyle, Halfpipe, Boardercross, and Rail Jam), where competitors earn points towards a national ranking and qualify to compete at the USASA National Championships. Subculture[ edit ] The snowboarding way of life came about as a natural response to the culture from which it emerged. Early on, there was a rebellion against skiing culture and the view that snowboarders were inferior. Skiers did not easily accept this new culture on their slopes. The two cultures contrasted each other in several ways including how they spoke, acted, and their entire style of clothing. Snowboarders first embraced the punk and later the hip-hop look into their style. Words such as "dude", "gnarly", and "Shred the Gnar" are some examples of words used in the snowboarding culture. Snowboarding subculture became a crossover between the urban and suburban styles on snow, which made an easy transition from surfing and skateboarding culture over to snowboarding culture. [51] In fact many skateboarders and surfers in the winter months snowboarded and were the early snowboarders. [51] The early stereotypes of snowboarding included "lazy", "grungy", "punk", "stoners", "troublemakers", and numerous others, many of which are associated with skateboarding and surfing as well. However, these stereotypes may be considered out of style. Snowboarding has become a sport that encompasses a very diverse international based crowd and fanbase of many millions, so much so that it is no longer possible to stereotype such a large community. Reasons for these dying stereotypes include how mainstream and popular the sport has become, with the shock factor of snowboarding's quick take off on the slopes wearing off. Skiers and snowboarders are becoming used to each other, showing more respect to each other on the mountain. "The typical stereotype of the sport is changing as the demographics change". [52] While these two subcultures are now becoming accustomed to each other, there are still three resorts, in the United States, which do not allow snowboarding. Alta , Deer Valley , and Mad River Glen are the last skiing only resorts in North America and have become a focal point over time for the remaining animosity between snowboarding and skiing. Common injuries[ edit ] Common injuries in snowboarding differ between professional and recreational groups. The most common type of injury for snowboarders is injury to the upper body. In recreational snowboarding, wrist injuries are more likely to occur. Among professional snowboarders, injuries to the lower half, specifically the knee joint, are more likely to occur. When injured, snowboarders are twice as likely to get a fracture as skiers. Other minor injuries that happen are "wrist injuries, shoulder soft tissue injuries, ankle injuries, concussions, and clavicle fractures, were seen injuries are very common when snowboarding". [53] In recreational and inexperienced "Most Injuries to snowboarders occurred more often while they were traveling at reckless speed on moderate slopes". [54] Another way injuries happen is because they try sticking with someone that is a higher skill level, which they are not capable of handling because of the lack of skill they possess. Some major injuries that occur during snowboarding are head, and spinal Injuries, "The main cause of spinal fractures in snowboarders was Jump landing failure and Compression type fractures occur in about 80% of snowboarders with vertebral fractures because they frequently fall backwards, and this can cause axial loading and anterior compression fractures". [55] Injuries to the upper body are much less common among professional snowboarders. "Most of the professionals and elite snowboarders frequently sustain injuries when trying to execute challenging tricks at high speeds and with increased levels of force to the lower limbs". [56] Safety and precautions[ edit ] Gloves with an integrated plastic element, seen left partially pulled out, as a wrist guard . The element is pressed tightly to the wrist with a wide, all-around velcro -fastened strap, which can be seen in loose state on the left and tightened on the right glove. This stabilizes the wrist and thus avoids its damage when falling onto the hands. Like some other winter sports, snowboarding comes with a certain level of risk. [57] The average snowboarder is a male in their early twenties, and there are three times as many men as there are women in the sport. Snowboarders have a 2.4 times greater risk of fractures than skiers, particularly in the upper extremities. Conversely, snowboarders have a lower risk of knee injuries than skiers. [58] The injury rate for snowboarding is about four to six per thousand persons per day, which is around double the injury rate for alpine skiing. [59] Injuries are more likely amongst beginners, especially those who do not take lessons with professional instructors. A quarter of all injuries occur to first-time riders and half of all injuries occur to those with less than a year of experience. Experienced riders are less likely to suffer injury, but the injuries that do occur tend to be more severe. [60] Two thirds of injuries occur to the upper body and one third to the lower body. This contrasts with alpine skiing where two thirds of injuries are to the lower body. The most common types of injuries are sprains, which account for around 40% of injuries. [61] The most common point of injury is the wrists – 40% of all snowboard injuries are to the wrists and 24% of all snowboard injuries are wrist fractures. [60] There are around 100,000 wrist fractures worldwide among snowboarders each year. [62] For this reason the use of wrist guards , either separate or built into gloves, is very strongly recommended. They are often compulsory in beginner's classes and their use reduces the likelihood of wrist injury by half. [63] In addition it is important for snow boarders to learn how to fall without stopping the fall with their hand by trying to "push" the slope away, as landing a wrist which is bent at a 90 degree angle increase the chance of it breaking. Rather, landing with the arms stretched out (like a wing) and slapping the slope with the entire arm is an effective way to break a fall. This is the method used by practitioners of judo and other martial arts to break a fall when they are thrown against the floor by a training partner. The risk of head injury is two to six times greater for snowboarders than for skiers and injuries follow the pattern of being rarer, but more severe, with experienced riders. Head injuries can occur both because of a collision and when failing to carry out a heel-side turn. The latter can result in the rider landing on his or her back and slamming the back of his or her head onto the ground, resulting in an occipital head injury. [64] For this reason, helmets are widely recommended. Protective eyewear is also recommended as eye injury can be caused by impact and snow blindness can be a result of exposure to strong ultra-violet light in snow-covered areas. The wearing of ultra-violet-absorbing goggles is recommended even on hazy or cloudy days as ultra-violet light can penetrate clouds. [65] Unlike ski bindings, snowboard bindings are not designed to release automatically in a fall. The mechanical support provided by the feet being locked to the board has the effect of reducing the likelihood of knee injury – 15% of snowboard injuries are to the knee, compared with 45% of all skiing injuries. Such injuries are typically to the knee ligaments, bone fractures are rare. [60] Fractures to the lower leg are also rare but 20% of injuries are to the foot and ankle. Fractures of the talus bone are rare in other sports but account for 2% of snowboard injuries – a lateral process talus fracture is sometimes called "snowboarder's ankle" by medical staff. This injury results in persistent lateral pain in the affected ankle yet is difficult to spot in a plain X-ray image. It may be misdiagnosed as just a sprain, with possibly serious consequences as not treating the fracture can result in serious long-term damage to the ankle. [60] The use of portable ultrasound for mountainside diagnostics has been reviewed and appears to be a plausible tool for diagnosing some of the common injuries associated with the sport. [66] Four to eight percent of snowboarding injuries take place while the person is waiting in ski-lift lines or entering and exiting ski lifts. Snowboarders push themselves forward with a free foot while in the ski-lift line, leaving the other foot (usually that of the lead leg) locked on the board at a 9–27 degree angle, placing a large torque force on this leg and predisposing the person to knee injury if a fall occurs. [67] [68] Snowboard binding rotating devices are designed to minimize the torque force, Quick Stance [69] being the first developed in 1995. [70] They allow snowboarders to turn the locked foot straight into the direction of the tip of the snowboard without removing the boot from the boot binding. Avalanches are a clear danger when on snowy mountain slopes. [71] It is best to learn the different kinds of avalanches, how to prevent causing one and how to react when one is going to happen. Also when going out onto the snow, all who practice an activity with increased chances of injury should have a basic First Aid knowledge and know how to deal with injuries that may occur. [72] Snowboarding boots should be well-fitted, with toes snug in the end of the boot when standing upright and slightly away from the end when in the snowboarding position. [73] Padding or "armor" is recommended on other body parts such as hips, knees, spine, and shoulders. To further help avoid injury to body parts, especially knees, it is recommended to use the right technique. To acquire the right technique, one should be taught by a qualified instructor. Also, when snowboarding alone, precaution should be taken to avoid tree wells , a particularly dangerous area of loose snow that may form at the base of trees. Some care is also required when waxing a board as fluorocarbon waxes emit toxic fumes when overheated. Waxing is best performed in a ventilated area with care being taken to use the wax at the correct temperature – the wax should be melted but not smoking or smoldering. [64] In a study conducted to examine the types of snowboarding injuries and changes in injury patterns over time, data was collected on injured snowboarders and skiers in a base-lodge clinic of a ski resort in Vermont over 18 seasons (1988–2006) and included extensive information about injury patterns, demographics, and experience. In conclusion of the study, the highest rate of injury was among young, inexperienced, female snowboarders. Injury rates in snowboarders have fluctuated over time but still remain higher than skiers. No evidence was found that those who spend more time in terrain parks are over represented in the injury population. [74] Stance Terminology[ edit ] The way in which a snowboarder normally rides most on their snowboard as determined by the placement of their feet and direction of travel. [75] Goofy Stance The stance of a snowboarder that normally rides with their right foot first. Regular Stance The stance of a snowboarder that normally rides with their left foot first. Switch Stance The opposite stance of what a snowboarder normally rides. Parts of a snowboard[ edit ] Binding The portion of the board that attaches the riders' feet to the snowboard. Heel Edge The edge of the snowboard that the riders' heels rest on. Nose Edge The forward edge of the snowboard. Tail Edge The trailing edge of the snowboard. Toe Edge Rotation Terminology[ edit ] Backside Rotation A flat rotation in which the back of the person's body is the first to intersect with the direction of travel; after 90 degrees of rotation, the person's back will be facing the direction of travel. Frontside Rotation A flat rotation in which the front of the person's body is the first to intersect with the direction of travel; after 90 degrees of rotation, the person's front will be facing the direction of travel.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Look up skating in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Skating involves any sports or recreational activity which consists of traveling on surfaces or on ice using skates, and may refer to: Ice skating[ edit ] Ice skating , moving on ice by using ice skates Figure skating , a sport in which individuals, duos, or groups perform on figure skates on ice Synchronized skating , a sport where between eight and sixteen perform together as a team Speed skating , a competitive form of ice skating in which the competitors race each other in traveling a certain distance on skates Short-track speed skating , a form of competitive ice speed skating Tour skating , a sport and recreational form of long distance ice skating on natural ice Roller skating , the traveling on surfaces with roller skates Inline skating , traveling on surfaces with skates having one line of wheels Freestyle slalom skating , a field of inline skating that involves performing tricks around a straight line of equally spaced cones Vert skating , riding inline skates on a vert ramp Aggressive inline skating , inline skating executed on specially designed inline skates with focus on grinding and spins Inline speed skating , the roller sport of racing on inline skates Artistic roller skating , a sport similar to figure skating but where contestants run on roller skates instead of ice skates
Toggle the table of contents Windsurfing From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Water sport Windsurfing on Columbia River , Oregon . Windsurfing is a wind propelled water sport that is a combination of sailing and surfing . [1] It is also referred to as "sailboarding" and "boardsailing", and emerged in the late 1960s from the Californian aerospace and surf culture. [2] Windsurfing gained a popular following across Europe and North America by the late 1970s [3] [4] [5] and had achieved significant global popularity by the 1980s. [6] Windsurfing became an Olympic sport in 1984. [7] Newer variants include windfoiling , kiteboarding and wingfoiling . Hydrofoil fins under the board allow the boards to safely lift out of the water and fly silently and smoothly above the surface even in lighter winds. Windsurfing is a recreational, family friendly sport, most popular at flat water locations around the world that offer safety and accessibility for beginner and intermediate participants. [8] Technique and equipment have evolved over the years. Major competitive disciplines include slalom, wave and freestyle. [9] Increasingly, "foiling"  is replacing traditional events and the IQfoil class [10] is the new Olympic windsurfing racing class for France in 2024. History[ edit ] Jim Drake invented and co-patented windsurfing in California between 1967 and 1970. [11] [12] [13] [14] Alternative concepts by Englishman Peter Chilvers and American Newman Darby are recognized as earlier sailboards. Drake was educated and trained as an aeronautical engineer at Stanford University. He spent his early years surfing, sailing and skiing. He conceived windsurfing to combine the simplicity of skiing with the pleasures of sailing. Drake is known historically as "The Father of Windsurfing." [12] [13] [15] Drake's patented invention was marketed and sold under the brand name "Windsurfer" for over 20 years by a company he cofounded with businessman Hoyle Schweitzer called Windsurfing International. [14] Windsurfing's popularity saw explosive growth in the 1970s and 1980s. Initially in Europe, then in North America. The sport began to take off in popularity around 1972 and by the end of the 1970s it was the fastest growing sport in the world. Originally, all windsurfing boards were "long boards". This type of board went relatively slower through the water, but worked well in low wind conditions. Light air, long board windsurfing was enjoyed by a wide range of participants including families with young children. During the 1980s a global community consisting of equipment designers, manufacturers, athletes, travel professionals and journalists worked together to propel windsurfing forward. Innovation allowed for the development of stiff, light weight planing short boards, foot straps, harnesses and more stable sails. Windsurfing shattered the world speed sailing record. Windsurfing's retail momentum eventually slowed with the arrival of newer action sports. By the 1990s closely related action sports such as mountain biking, snowboarding, stand up paddle boarding (SUP) and kite boarding all directly competed for popularity with windsurfing. Many windsurfing schools closed, or switched to teaching kite boarding and currently teach mostly wing foiling. After some lean years in the 2000s, the sport has seen a steady revival through the explosion of foiling. [16] Darby sailboard, Popular Science , 1965 Modern windsurfing, as a sport and recreational activity, did not emerge until the latter half of the 20th century. The earliest version of a sailboard design utilizing a freely articulating sail on top of a board was created in 1962 by American Newman Darby. Independently, engineer Jim Drake invented and co-patented the version we all know today and called it Windsurfing- a new new concept in sailing . [17] [12] [13] [14] Long before this modern moment, there were small scale sailing craft that have used wind as the driving force, many of them sourced to the Polynesians who have been riding the wind and waves for centuries. Early accounts suggest island peoples were undertaking day trips over oceans standing upright on a solid board with a vertical sail. [18] In the early 19th century, people in logging communities around western Lake Michigan were purportedly fixing sails to logs as part of log float control and for recreation. [19] [ full citation needed ] In 1948, 20-year-old Newman Darby was the first to conceive the idea of using a handheld sail and rig mounted on a universal joint so that he could control his small catamaran —the first rudderless sailboard ever built that allowed a person to steer by shifting his or her weight in order to tilt the sail fore and aft . [20] [ self-published source? ] Darby filed for a patent but lacked the funds to resubmit. However, he is widely recognized as its inventor as well as [21] the first to conceive, design, and build a sailboard with a universal joint. [22] In his own words, Darby experimented throughout much of the 1950s and 1960s and it was not until 1963 that an improved sailboard with a conventional stayed sloop rig sail arrangement made it more stable than the one built in 1948. [23] S. Newman Darby created his first product for a wider market in 1964 that he called the "Darby sailboard" [24] on the Susquehanna River , Pennsylvania , United States. While Darby's "sailboard" incorporated a pivoting rig, it was " square rigged " or "kite rigged" and was subject to the associated limitations. Unlike the modern windsurfer design, Darby's sailboard was operated "back winded", with the sailor's back to the lee side of a kite-shaped sail . This is a much less efficient and less dynamic sailing position and opposite of how a modern windsurfer is operated. Darby's article stated that "you can learn to master a type of maneuvering that's been dead since the age of the picturesque square riggers". He began selling his sailboards in 1964. [25] The main focus of his company, Darby Industries, was to sell plans such that any school-age child could build one for under $50. Rather than building personal wealth, his focus was to introduce youth to the sport of sailing in even very shallow water. [26] [22] [25] [27] [28] A promotional article by Darby was published in the August 1965 edition of Popular Science magazine. [29] Darby died in 2016 reportedly feeling pleased with the recognition he received for having created an early version of the sailboard. [30] Twelve-year-old Peter Chilvers is also cited for inventing a kind of sailboard in England in 1958. [31] Jim Drake sailing in California Jim Drake's Wing Stanford educated aeronautical engineer Jim Drake and fellow aeronautical engineer Fred Payne conceived  and designed a sail powered surfboard in 1962. Their version differed from Darby's in many significant ways. The sailor stood upright on a large surfboard while holding directly onto the windward side of a small triangular sail. [32] Originally, they designed it to be propelled by a hand held wing rather than an attached, masted sail. Soon they decided a universal joint attaching a movable sail was more practical. After learning of Drake's revolutionary sailing concept , one of Drake's family friends, a businessman named Hoyle Schweitzer, became interested in marketing Drake's new invention. As a businessman, Schweitzer imagined the profit potential and encouraged Drake to build a functional prototype for product testing. Later, when Drake's prototype worked, he helped Drake to patent the idea. From the outset, the two men were motivated by different forces. Drake conceptualized, engineered, built and tested the first windsurfer. Schweitzer, while not directly involved in the invention, helped by organizing the business details of patenting, marketing and selling Drake's new craft. As a partnership, Drake came up with the original concept and Schweitzer marketed and sold it. Both men's names appear on the patent. [13] [14] [21] Years later, in 2002, when the Professional Windsurfing Association (PWA) inducted both Drake and Schweitzer into the Windsurfing Hall of Fame, they called Drake "The Father of Windsurfing" for his role as inventor and egalitarian figure head throughout his lifetime, [33] [34] [35] and called Schweitzer "the man who brought windsurfing to the masses" [35] based on his efforts to promote the Windsurfer brand's popularity. It was a brief but productive collaboration between a talented engineer and a motivated businessman that together created the modern sport of windsurfing. [32] [36] [35] Drake has stated in various interviews [37] that he recognizes Darby and Chilvers as early sailboard pioneers and sees himself as the sports "re-inventor". Drake's first prototype, the Windsurfer name[ edit ] Drake is known historically as one of the world's top aeronautical engineers. He was also an expert craftsman in his spare time. He combined both skills to conceive and build the world's first windsurfer prototype. First, he carefully engineered a mathematical simulation of his concept based on the physics of windsurfing . He then crafted nearly all of the windsurfer prototype components by hand in his Santa Monica, California home garage in January 1967. He built the wishbone boom, daggerboard and mast foot from laminated strips of teak wood. He custom designed and built a wood press jig for shaping the curve into the wishbone boom. The universal joint was built by reconfiguring a commercially available sailboat swivel joint constructed from heavy duty marine stainless steel with additional teflon components. Drake engineered the custom sail, which was made from Dacron sail cloth and cut and sewn by sail maker Bob Broussard into a triangular Bermuda rig . The custom board Drake engineered required a greater amount of displacement volume for floatation than was found in a traditional surfboard so an extra large custom built foam blank was constructed by Gordon "Grubby" Clark of Clark foam and shaped by Jim Drake and Gary Seaman at the Con Surfboard factory in Santa Monica, California. A repurposed hollow fiberglass mast was taken from a small " Flipper " racing dingy rig. [32] [38] To gather the needed materials, Drake carefully instructed Schweitzer what raw materials to purchase such as an extra large foam blank to build the board and a hollow fiberglass mast for the sail. Drake completed construction of the prototype in his own garage during his spare time within a few months. Jim Drake, windsurfing for the first time (movie) May 21, 1967 Marina del Rey, California Drake's question came down to simple operation of how a standing person could control both the power of the sail as well as the direction of the craft without a rudder. [32] Drake discovered that one's ability to rotate the sail's position relative to the board could allow control of both power and direction. Experimenting with a rotational design, he invented the concept for the universal joint . Drake completed his engineering concept with a wishbone boom , a daggerboard , mast , mast foot, triangular sail and fin. [32] Interestingly, because Drake always envisioned in his mind the sailor standing on the board with the sail in their hands, he originally forgot to include a rope, now called an uphaul, which allows the sailor to pull the sail from the water. His first day on the water was made more difficult without this essential item, but by the second day he had invented that part as well. On May 21, 1967, Jim Drake , along with his wife Wendy and daughter Stephanie, went to Marina del Rey 's Jamaica Bay to make history with the world's first modern sailboard. Returning to Marina del Rey one week later, this time with the skeg and uphaul, Drake succeeded at sailing the board the way he designed it to be used. With his confidence buoyed from multiple days of practice in the protected bay, Drake next took his sailboard onto the open ocean at Will Rogers State Beach in Santa Monica, California. Drake subsequently taught Schweitzer how to windsurf and soon the sport was launched. The first three windsurfers ever built, 1968 Originally Drake and Schweitzer wanted to name their new sailboard concept "Skate" (SK8), however changed the name to "Baja Board" in early 1968. Schweitzer was marketing a prototype of the Baja Board in Seattle , when Bert Salisbury stopped his car to have a look, and commented: "Gee I have the perfect name for it! Windsurfing!" The name was soon changed to Windsurfer, sold by the company Windsurfing International. The details of Jim Drake's original windsurfing concept were published in 1969 by Drake's employer at the time, the RAND Corporation, in a technical paper written and presented by him titled Windsurfing - A New Concept in Sailing ." [39] [17] Further details can be read in published interviews . [40] Despite forty years of subsequent development, the design is still remarkably similar to today's windsurfing equipment, and the word "windsurfer" has become synonymous with the sport itself. The sport's first company[ edit ] Jim Drake and Hoyle Schweitzer together started the sport's first company, Windsurfing International, in late 1968 out of Drake's Santa Monica, California home. Both men were employed full time outside of their startup windsurfing business and so windsurfing was little more than an experimental hobby for them at that time. Drake and his wife Wendy, along with Schweitzer and his wife Diane worked closely together in their spare time to create a marketable framework for the new sport. Drake and Schweitzer collaborated informally as friends rather than legally bound business partners, as no formal business partnership was ever signed between them. Unexpectedly, Drake was temporarily relocated 2000 miles away to design innovative rocket planes at The Pentagon . Around this same time, Schweitzer lost his job as a computer software salesman. While Drake was away for two years immersed in engineering work on the other side of the country, Schweitzer began manufacturing and selling Windsurfers, as well as incorporating the company Windsurfing International and collected licensing fees on over 100,000 boards in Europe without ever informing or including Drake. Schweitzer concealed from Drake the somewhat large profits he was beginning to make from selling the boards Drake had invented. Observers close to the situation believe it was always Schweitzer's plan to keep Drake uniformed of the large profit potential long enough to misrepresent and under value the real worth of the patent so that Schweitzer could buy out Drake's half of the patent for as little as possible. When Drake later discovered Schweitzer's unethical and dishonest actions he was deeply confused and angered. Drake, who trusted Schweitzer and his family, was shocked that his friend would deceive him in this unkind way. [21] [41] Drake originally was not interested in forfeiting his half of the patent. However, Schweitzer and his attorneys would continue for 5 years to aggressively pressure Drake to sell his half of the patent to Windsurfing International in order for Schweitzer to secure a lucrative monopoly on all future royalties. Jim Drake, 1974 [40] [42] Windsurfing International registered the term "Windsurfer" as a trademark at the United States Patent and Trademark Office in 1970. Windsurfing International Inc. created a popular one-design racing class, which was influenced by the desire to provide a fleet of racers with a uniformly constructed "boat," so that rider skill, rather than equipment choice, would determine competitive results. The first Windsurfer Class World Championship regatta took place in San Diego, California in 1973. The Windsurfer Class fleet was based the success of the Laser and Hobie Cat classes. Each Windsurfer had an identical computer-cut sail, a technology new at that time and pioneered by Ian Bruce. Patent disputes[ edit ] On March 27, 1968, Jim Drake, an aeronautical engineer, and Hoyle Schweitzer, a businessman [43] filed [44] the very first windsurfing patent, which was granted by the USPTO in 1970. [45] Through the seventies, and early eighties windsurfing was the fastest growing sport on earth. Schweitzer aggressively protected his patent around the world through Sub-licensing the rights to anyone who wanted to manufacture and sell sailboards. Windsurfing International's usurious royalty fee charges, which its competitors were forced to pay, were so high that many observers felt it needlessly limited the growth of the sport. Mr. Schweitzer claimed this was to promote his brand and the Windsurfer One Design racing class, but most believed it was so he could maximize his own profits. [46] [1] The sport underwent very rapid growth however, particularly in Europe after the sale of a sub-license sold to Ten Cate Sports in the Netherlands. [32] In 1975 Ten Cate Sports sold 45,000 boards in Europe. At the same time, Schweitzer also sought to defend his patent rights vigorously against unauthorized manufacturers. This led to a host of predating windsurfer-like devices being presented to courts around the world by companies disputing Windsurfing International's rights to the invention. [47] In 1979, Schweitzer licensed [48] [49] Brittany , France-based company Dufour Wing, which was later merged with Tabur Marine – the precursor of Bic Sport . [50] Europe was now the largest growing market for windsurfers, and the sub-licensed companies – Tabur, F2, Mistral – wanted to find a way to remove or reduce their royalty payments to Windsurfing International. Tabur lawyers found prior art, in a local English newspaper which had published a story with a picture about Peter Chilvers , who as a young boy on Hayling Island on the south coast of England, assembled his first board combined with a sail, in 1958. This board used a universal joint, one of the key parts of the Windsurfing International's patent. They also found stories published about the 1948 invention of the sailboard by Newman Darby and his wife Naomi in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania . [25] In Windsurfing International Inc. v Tabur Marine (GB) Ltd. 1985 RPC 59 [51] with Tabur backed financially by French sailing fan Baron Marcel Bich , British courts recognized the prior art of Peter Chilvers. It did not incorporate the curved wishbone booms of the modern windsurfer, but rather a "straight boom" that became curved in use. The courts found that the Schweitzer windsurfer boom was "merely an obvious extension". This court case set a precedent for patent law in the United Kingdom, in terms of inventive step and non-obviousness ; the court upheld the defendant's claim that the Schweitzer patent was invalid, based on film footage of Chilvers. Schweitzer then sued the company in Canada, where the opposition team again financially backed by Bic included Chilvers and Jim Drake, and Schweitzer lost again. After the cases, no longer obliged to pay Windsurfing International any royalty payments, the now renamed Bic Sport became one of the world's larger producers of windsurfing equipment, with an annual production of 15,000 boards. [50] There is no evidence that Schweitzer or Drake had knowledge of any prior inventions similar to theirs. Drake accepted in retrospect that, although he can be credited with the invention, he was "probably no better than third," behind mid-west based Newman Darby and Englishman Peter Chilvers . [32] The battle over the origin story of the sport would go on to cause much legal grief for the global sporting phenomenon for much of the 1980s. In 1983, Schweitzer sued. [48] [49] Swiss board manufacturer Mistral [52] and lost. Mistral's defense hinged on the work of US inventor Newman Darby , who by 1965 conceived the "sailboard": a hand-held square rigged "kite" sail on a floating platform for recreational use. [25] Eventually US courts recognized the Schweitzer windsurfer as an obvious step from Darby's prior art. [53] Schweitzer had to reapply for a patent under severely limited terms, and finally it expired in 1987. Shortly thereafter, having lost its license royalty income, Windsurfing International ceased operations. [46] In 1984, Australian courts determined a patent case: Windsurfing International Inc & Anor v Petit & Anor [54] (also part reported in 3 IPR 449 or [1984] 2 NSWLR 196), which attributed the first legally accepted use of a split boom to an Australian boy, Richard Eastaugh. Between the ages of ten and thirteen, from 1946 to 1949, aided by his younger brothers, he built around 20 galvanized iron canoes and hill trolleys which he equipped with sails with split bamboo booms. He sailed these in a sitting position and not as a windsurfer standing up, near his home on the Swan River in Perth . The judge noted that, "Mr Eastaugh greatly exaggerated the capacity of his galvanised iron canoes to sail to windward" and that, "There is no corroboration of Mr Eastaugh's experiences by any other witness. Neither of his brothers or his father was called". [55] It is acknowledged in the courts that the separate Eastaugh (1946–1949), Darby (1965) and Chilvers (1958) inventions pre-dated the Schweitzer/Drake patent (1968). [32] By the late 1980s the sport was massive and in the midst of a full-blown marketing and legal battle between the original market in the US, and the exploding European markets. [6] This epic legal battle laid the ground for a still running rivalry between the European and American hemispheres. Trademarks[ edit ] Windsurfing International briefly claimed trademark rights with respect to the word "windsurfer". While this was registered in the United States for some years, it was not accepted for registration in many jurisdictions as the word was considered too descriptive. Registration was ultimately lost in the United States for the same reason. Eventually the sport became known widely as either sailboarding or windsurfing. Equipment[ edit ] Windsurfers are often classified as either shortboards or longboards. Longboards are usually longer than 3 meters, with a retractable daggerboard , and are optimized for lighter winds or course racing. Shortboards are less than 3 meters long and are designed for planing conditions. While windsurfing is possible under a wide range of wind conditions, most intermediate and advanced recreational windsurfers prefer to sail in conditions that allow for consistent planing with multi-purpose, not overly specialized, free-ride equipment. Larger (100 to 140 liters) free-ride boards are capable of planing at wind speeds as low as 12 kn (6 m/s) if rigged with an adequate, well-tuned sail in the six to eight square meter range. The pursuit of planing in lower winds has driven the popularity of wider and shorter boards, with which planing is possible in wind as low as 8 kn (4 m/s), if sails in the 10 to 12 square meter range are used. Modern windsurfing boards can be classified into many categories: The original Windsurfer board had a body made out of polyethylene filled with PVC foam. Later, hollow glass-reinforced epoxy designs were used. Most boards produced today have an expanded polystyrene foam core reinforced with a composite sandwich shell, that can include carbon fiber , kevlar , or fiberglass in a matrix of epoxy and sometimes plywood and thermoplastics . Racing and wave boards are usually very light (5 to 7 kg), and are made out of carbon sandwich. Such boards are very stiff, and veneer is sometimes used to make them more shock-resistant. Boards aimed at the beginners are heavier (8 to 15 kg) and more robust, containing more fiberglass. [56] Beginner boards: (Sometimes called funboards) these often have a daggerboard , are almost as wide as Formula boards, and have plenty of volume, hence stability. Freeride: Boards meant for comfortable recreational cruising (mostly straight-line sailing and occasional turning) at planing speed (aka blasting), mainly in flat waters or in light to moderate swell. They typically fall into the volume range of 90 to 170 liters. The so-called freeride sailing movement diverged from course racing as more recreational sailors chose to sail freely without being constrained to sailing on courses around buoys. Racing longboards: Internationally recognised One Design Classes such as the WINDSURFER Class, Mistral One Design, or the old Olympic RS:X class race boards, and the new 2024 Olympic Class iQFoil . Formula Windsurfing Class: Shorter boards up to one meter in width, for use in Formula Windsurfing races. See below for a more detailed description. Windsurfing in the late evening on a longboard at Sandbanks in the 1980s ( Poole Harbour , England). Slalom boards: In the past, the key feature of slalom boards was merely speed, but it has been proven that maneuverability and ease of use are as important as speed in order to get you around the slalom course faster, and therefore modern slalom boards are shortboards aimed at top speed, maneuverability and ease of use. Speed boards: In essence an extremely narrow and sleek slalom board, built for top speed only. Freestyle boards: Related to wave boards in terms of maneuverability, these are wider, higher volume boards geared specifically at performing acrobatic tricks (jumps, rotations, slides, flips and loops) on flat water. Usually 80 to 110 liters in volume, and about 203 to 230 centimeters in length, with widths frequently in excess of 60 centimeters. Freestyle boards began to diverge more noticeably in design from wave boards in the early part of the 2000 decade, as aerial tricks (the Vulcan, Spock, Grubby, Flaka, and related New School maneuvers, almost all involving a jump-and-spin component) became the predominant part of the freestyle repertoire, superseding Old School moves, in which the board did not leave contact with the water. Wave boards: Smaller, lighter, more maneuverable boards for use in breaking waves. Characteristically, sailors on wave boards perform high jumps while sailing against waves, and they ride the face of a wave performing narrow linked turns (bottom turns, cutbacks, and top-turns) in a similar way to surfing . Wave boards usually have a volume between 65 and 105 liters, with a length between 215 and 235 centimeters, and 50 to 60 centimeters in width. A general rule is for a sailor to use a wave board whose volume in liters is about the same as the sailor's weight in kilograms – more volume providing additional flotation for sailing in light winds, and less for high winds, where less volume is needed to achieve planing. In recent years, the average width of wave boards has increased slightly, as the length has shrunk, while the range of volume has been maintained the same more or less—according to board designers this makes wave boards easier to use under a wider range of conditions by sailors of differing abilities. The most common sizes of sails used with wave boards are in the range of 3.4 to 6.0 square meters, depending on the wind speed and the weight of the sailor. Sails Main article: Sail Modern windsurfing sails are often made of monofilm (clear polyester film), dacron (woven polyester ) and mylar . Areas under high load may be reinforced with kevlar . Two designs of a sail are predominant: camber induced and rotational. Cambered sails have 1–5 camber inducers - plastic devices at the ends of battens which cup against the mast. They help create a rigid aerofoil shape for faster speed and stability, but at the cost of maneuverability and how light the sail feels. The trend is that racier sails have camber inducers while wave sails and most recreational sails do not. The rigidity of the sail is also determined by a number of battens. Beginners' sails often do not have battens, so they are lighter and easier to use in light winds. However, as the sailor improves, a battened sail will provide greater stability in stronger winds. Rotational sails have battens which protrude beyond the back aspect of the mast. They flip or "rotate" to the other side of the mast when tacking or jibing, hence the rotation in the name. Rotational sails have an aerofoil shape on the leeward side when powered, but are nearly flat when sheeted out (unpowered). In comparison with cambered sails, rotational designs offer less power and stability when sailing straight, but are easier to handle when maneuvering. Rotational sails are usually lighter and easier to rig. A windsurfing sail is tensioned at two points: at the tack (by downhaul ), and at the clew (by outhaul ). There is a set of pulleys for downhauling at the tack, and a grommet at the clew . Most shape is given to the sail by applying a very strong downhaul, which by design bends the mast. The outhaul tension is relatively weak, mostly providing leverage for controlling the sail's angle of attack. The sail is tuned by adjusting the downhaul and the outhaul tension. Generally, a sail is trimmed more (flatter shape) for stronger winds. More downhaul tension loosens the upper part of the leech, allowing the top of the sail to twist and "spill" wind during gusts, shifting the center of effort (strictly, the center of pressure ) down. Releasing downhaul tension shifts the center of effort up. More outhaul lowers the camber/draft, making the sail flatter and easier to control, but less powerful; less outhaul results in more draft, providing more low-end power, but usually limiting speed by increasing aerodynamic resistance. The disciplines of windsurfing (wave, freestyle, freeride) require different sails. Wave sails are reinforced to survive the surf, and are nearly flat when depowered to allow riding waves. Freestyle sails are also flat when depowered, and have high low-end power to allow quick acceleration. Freeride sails are all-rounders that are comfortable to use and are meant for recreational windsurfing. Race sails provide speed at the expense of qualities like comfort or maneuverability. The size of the sail is measured in square meters and can be from 3 m2 to 5.5 m2 for wave sails and 6 m2 to 15 m2 for race sails, with ranges for freestyle and freeride sails spanning somewhere between these extremes. Learning sails for children can be as small as 0.7 m2 and race sails up to 15 m2. Associated Equipment
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Use of a kayak on water A woman kayaking in a lagoon Kayaking in whitewater rapids Kayaking is the use of a kayak for moving over water. It is distinguished from canoeing by the sitting position of the paddler and the number of blades on the paddle. A kayak is a low-to-the-water, canoe-like boat in which the paddler sits facing forward, legs in front, using a double-bladed paddle to pull front-to-back on one side and then the other in rotation. [1] Most kayaks have closed decks, although sit-on-top and inflatable kayaks are growing in popularity as well. [2] History Kayaks were created thousands of years ago by the Inuit , formerly known as Eskimos , of the northern Arctic regions. They used driftwood and sometimes the skeleton of whales, to construct the frame of the kayak, and animal skin, particularly seal skin was used to create the body. The main purpose for creating the kayak, which literally translates to "hunter's boat" was for hunting and fishing. [3] The kayak's stealth capabilities allowed for the hunter to sneak up behind animals on the shoreline and successfully catch their prey. In the 1740s, Russian explorers led by the Danish explorer Vitus Bering came in contact with the Aleutians , who had taken the basic kayak concept and developed multiple designs specifically for hunting, transportation, and environmental conditions. They soon recognized the Aleutians were very skillful at hunting sea otters by kayak. Because otters were a popular commodity in Europe and Asia, they would exploit and even kidnap Aleutians and keep them aboard their ships to work and hunt. [4] By the mid-1800s the kayak became increasingly popular and the Europeans became interested. German and French men began kayaking for sport. In 1931, Adolf Anderle was the first person to kayak down the Salzachöfen Gorge , which is believed to be the birthplace of modern-day white-water kayaking. [5] In 1932, long-distance kayaker Fridel Meyer paddled from Bavaria to Westminster , England, and in 1933 she paddled from Westminster to Montrose , Scotland. [6] Kayak races were introduced in the Berlin Olympic Games in 1936. In the 1950s, fiberglass kayaks were developed and commonly used, until the 1980s when polyester and polyethylene plastic kayaks were introduced. Kayaking progressed as a fringe sport in the U.S. until the 1970s, when it became a mainstream popular sport. Now, more than 10 white water kayaking events are featured in the Olympics. [7] While kayaking represents a key international watersport, few academic studies have (to date) been conducted on the role kayaking plays in the lives and activities of the public [8] Design Kayaks can also be classified by their design and the materials from which they are made. Each design has its specific advantages, including performance, maneuverability, stability, and paddling style. Kayaks can be made of metal, fiberglass, wood, plastic, fabrics, and inflatable fabrics such as PVC or rubber, and more recently expensive but feather-light carbon fiber. Each material also has its specific advantages, including strength, durability, portability, flexibility, resistance to ultraviolet , and storage requirements. For example, wooden kayaks can be created from kits or built by hand. Stitch and glue, plywood kayaks can be lighter than any other material except skin-on frame. Inflatable kayaks, [9] made from lightweight fabric, can be deflated and easily transported and stored, and are considered to be remarkably tough and durable compared to some hard-sided boats . [10] [11] Equipment Glowworm Kayaking at Waimarino Adventure Park There are many types of kayaks used in flat water and whitewater kayaking. The sizes and shapes vary drastically depending on what type of water to be paddled on and also what the paddler would like to do. The second set of essentials for kayaking is an off-set paddle where the paddle blades are tilted to help reduce wind resistance while the other blade is being used in the water. These vary in length and also shape depending on the intended use, the height of the paddler, and the paddler's preference. Kayaks should be equipped with one or more buoyancy aid (also called flotation) which creates air space that helps prevent a kayak from sinking when filled with water. A life jacket should be worn at all times (also called a personal flotation device or PFD), and a helmet is also often required for most kayaking and is mandatory for white water kayaking . [12] [13] Various other pieces of safety gear include a whistle for signaling for help; throwing ropes to help rescue other kayakers; and, a diving knife and appropriate water shoes should be used depending upon the risks the water and terrain pose. Proper clothing such as a dry suit, wetsuit or spray top also help protect kayakers from cold water or air temperatures. [14] Types of kayaks "Sit on top" kayaks place the paddler in an open, shallowly concave deck above the water level. This style is usually used for non-white water activities as most find it harder to stay inside the kayak while also preventing them from "rolling" which allows the user to upright themselves if they flip over. There are some benefits to sit on tops such as the ability for a "dry hatch" these are a compartment, that usually runs the length of the kayak, which in addition to providing more buoyancy allows for the kayaker to store various equipment. "Sit on top" kayaks often use "through holes" which allows any water that got in the boat to make it through the deck and dry hatch to drain. [15] "Cockpit style" involves sitting with the legs and hips inside the kayak hull with a spray deck or "spray skirt" that creates a water-resistant seal around the waist. There is a wide range of "cockpit style" boats which usually allow for more user control of the boat as they are able to push against the walls of the boat to tip in order to complete maneuvers. A common variant of "cockpit style" kayaks are "play boats" these are usually very short kayaks in which the user does tricks and maneuvers: "Inflatables" are a hybrid of the two previous configurations; these boats have an open deck, but the paddler sits below the level of the deck. These boats are often subject to more instability due to the way the boat sits higher in the water. They are often used in a more commercial setting, they are often affectionately called "Duckies". "Tandems" are configured for multiple paddlers, in contrast to the single person designs featured by most kayaks. Tandems can be used by two or even three paddlers. [16] Activities involving kayaks Because of their range and adaptability, kayaks can be useful for other outdoor activities such as diving, fishing, wilderness exploration and search and rescue during floods. [17] Diving Main article: Kayak diving Kayak diving is a type of recreational diving where the divers paddle to a diving site in a kayak carrying all their gear to the place they want to dive. The range can be up to several kilometres along the coastline from the launching point to a place where access would be difficult from the shore, although the sea is sheltered. It is a considerably cheaper alternative to using a powered boat, as well as combining the experience of sea kayaking at the same time. Kayak diving gives the diver independence from dive boat operators, while allowing dives at sites which are too far to comfortably swim, but are sufficiently sheltered. [18] Fishing Main article: Kayak fishing Kayak fishing is fishing from a kayak. The kayak has long been a means of transportation and a stealth means of approaching easily spooked fish, such as cobia and flounder . Kayak fishing has gained popularity in recent times due to its broad appeal as an environmentally friendly and healthy method of transportation, as well as its relatively low cost of entry compared to motorized boats. [19] [20] In addition, kayaks allow greater access by their ability to operate in shallow water, getting in and out along the shoreline, and having the ability to get away from the crowds to find a more solitary environment where boats may not have the ability to do so. [21] Ecotour guide stands on a kayak, spotting dolphins and manatees around Lido Key . Ecotourism Main article: Ecotourism Ecotourism based on kayak trips is gaining in popularity. In warm-water vacation destinations such as Sarasota Keys , guided kayak trips take kayakers on a tour of the local ecosystem. Kayakers can watch dolphins breach and manatees eat seagrass, in shallow bay water. [22] Whitewater Main article: Whitewater kayaking One of the most common uses of kayaks for hobbyists is whitewater kayaking. Whitewater kayaking is when a kayaker traverses down a series of rapids. The difficulty of these rapid ranges from Class I to Class VI. The difficulty of rapids often changes with water level and debris in the river. Debris that inhibits a kayaker's path are often called "strainers" as they "strain" out the kayakers like a colander. There are often training camps as well as man-made structures to help train kayakers. [23] Surf ski Main article: Surf ski A surfski (or: "surf ski", "surf-ski") is generally the longest of all kayaks and is a performance oriented kayak designed for speed on open water, most commonly the ocean, although it is well suited to all bodies of water and recreational paddling. Winter kayaking Winter kayaking is inherently more dangerous than regular paddling, as cold water and air temperatures can quickly lead to hypothermia . The activity requires the use of clothing that negates the effects of the elements on the kayaker. [24] See also
Rafting in Alaska Rafting on the Tara river, Bosnia Rafting and whitewater rafting are recreational outdoor activities which use an inflatable raft to navigate a river or other body of water. This is often done on whitewater or different degrees of rough water. Dealing with risk  is often a part of the experience. [1] This activity as an adventure sport has become popular since the 1950s, if not earlier, evolving from individuals paddling 10 feet (3.0 m) to 14 feet (4.3 m) rafts with double-bladed paddles or oars to multi-person rafts propelled by single-bladed paddles and steered by a person at the stern, or by the use of oars . [2] Rafting on certain sections of rivers is considered an extreme sport and can be fatal, while other sections are not so extreme or difficult. Rafting is also a competitive sport practiced around the world which culminates in a world rafting championship event between the participating nations. The International Rafting Federation , often referred to as the IRF, is the worldwide body which oversees all aspects of the sport. [3] Equipment[ edit ] Rafting equipment has continuously evolved and developed significantly from old rubber WW II era military surplus rafts. Modern whitewater rafts are typically made with advanced nylon or Kevlar infused plastics like PVC or urethane; though many of the more entry-level low-cost manufacturers still use a glued rubber. Plastic is generally more durable, longer-lasting, and just as easy to repair compared to older rubber rafts. [4] Paddles and oars are the typical means of propulsion for rafts and come in many sizes and varieties with specific river conditions in mind. Paddles[ edit ] Paddles are a combination of layered wood, plastic, aluminium, carbon fiber, or other advanced composites. There are many types and combinations of these materials with lower-end entry-level paddles being composed of cheap aluminum and plastic. Higher-end models are constructed of high-end composites and mostly utilized by professional rafting guides, raft racers, and expedition paddlers. [5] The basic paddle design for rafting consists of 3 parts: Single blade Shaft T-grip Paddles are typically utilized by rafters in smaller and lower volume rivers where rocks and other hazards can damage larger oars. Paddles are typically used by guests on commercial trips as well since it is seen as a more engaging way to enjoy the river trip. When paddles are used in a raft it is referred to as "paddling" or "paddle guiding". [6] Oars[ edit ] Oars are commonly made from the same materials as paddles. Wood, plastic, aluminum, and carbon fiber. Oars are designed for several different rivers with slightly different blade shapes built to handle varying river conditions. Wooden oars are typically built as one solid piece to help retain strength and resilience of the oar while it is strained under a load. Composite or metallic oars typically are made in three parts: Blade Shaft Grip All of these parts are interchangeable and can be upgraded and altered in many ways to make rowing more enjoyable. [7] Oars are generally used on wider flatter rivers of higher volume to facilitate moving more efficiently across long slow-moving pools, though anglers will often use shorter oars on smaller rafts in low volume rivers to help them maintain an advantageous upstream position while anglers cast from the raft. When a raft utilizes oars it is called "rowing" though many people typically incorrectly refer to this as "oaring" or "oar framing", however, these terms are incorrect and often suggest inexperience when used in conversation with members of the rafting community. Oars typically use one of 2 systems to attach to the boat, but in either case, they interface with the boat through a large metallic frame strapped to the boat called an "oar frame". Oars connect to the frame by either a pin and clip system or a system called oarlocks . Either system connects to the frame via oar towers on either side of the frame. Pins and clips[ edit ] Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Pins are referred to as "thole pins" or "oar pins". A large metal clip attaches to the oar and clips onto the pin. The top of the pin has a rubber or plastic stopper that prevents the oar from slipping over the top of the pin. The bottom of the pin connects to an oar tower designed to hold the pin in place. This system is an older system though it is useful for certain types of river running namely big, dangerous Class 5 rivers that require your oars to stay in place as much as possible.
Global Positioning System (GPS) Much of the remaining needed camping equipment is commonly available in the home, including dishes, pots, and pans; however, many people opt not to use their home items but instead utilize equipment better tailored for camping. These amenities include heavy plastic tableware and salt and pepper shakers with tops that close to shelter the shakers from rain. Old kitchen gear purchased from thrift stores or garage sales may also be used in place of home items as an alternative to buying specialized (and more expensive) camping equipment. Backpackers use lightweight and portable equipment. [17] Campgrounds and commercial campsites[ edit ] By the 1960s camping had become an established family holiday standard and today camp sites are ubiquitous across Europe and North America . Tent trailer camping provides comfort in a towable package Campers span a broad range of age, ability, and ruggedness, and campsites are designed in many ways as well. Many campgrounds have sites with facilities such as fire rings, barbecue grills, utilities, shared bathrooms, and laundry, as well as access to nearby recreational facilities, however, not all campsites have similar levels of development. Campsites can range from a patch of dirt to a level, paved pad with sewer and electricity with many public and private campgrounds also offering cabin options. (For more information on facilities, see the campsite and RV park articles.) Other vehicles used for camping include motorcycles, touring bicycles, boats, canoes, pack animals , and even bush planes ; although backpacking on foot is a popular alternative. A large recreational vehicle provides many amenities when camping. A group of men, women, and children sitting on the chairs in a camp in the forest. July 7th, 1910, Wainwright, Alberta. Tent camping sites often cost less than campsites with full amenities, and most allow direct access by car. Some "walk-in" sites lie a short walk away from the nearest road but do not require full backpacking equipment. Those who seek a rugged experience in the outdoors prefer to camp with only tents, or with no shelter at all ("under the stars"). United States[ edit ] According to an infographic produced by Red Rover Camping and based on data from the 2014 American Camper Report published by the Coleman Company, Inc. and the Outdoor Foundation, camping in the United States is gaining popularity after a fall of 4.2  million participants from 2011 to 2012. [18] United Kingdom[ edit ] According to data provided by the Great British Tourism Survey conducted by Visit England, almost 4.5  million camping and caravanning holidays were taken by British residents during the first half of 2015, for an average of 3.7 nights. [19] As in the United States, camping is gaining popularity, with an 8% increase in trips compared to the same period in 2014. The Caravan Club and the Camping and Caravanning Club represent UK campers. Scotland allows " wild camping " on privately-owned wilderness. France[ edit ] Data collected by the Fédération Nationale De L'Hôtellerie De Plein Air (FNHPA) shows that around 113  million nights were taken at French campsites in 2015, which was up by 3.9% in the same period in 2014. French holidaymakers took 77 million of these, and the rest was made up of other nationalities, the majority of whom were Dutch, German, and UK tourists. The French Government hopes to have 100  million tourists each year by 2030. The most popular region for camping is Languedoc and Roussillon with around 19,331,663 nights spent at campsites during 2015, whilst the department with the most campsites is the Vendée. [20] Canada[ edit ] Canada is a country that has four different seasons throughout the year. In this day and age, with the proper camping equipment, it is possible to camp all over Canada all year round. At the end of the 19th century, Canada started establishing areas all over the territory to be later named " National Parks ". [21] These days, the parks are now known for being some of the most popular campgrounds in the country. But it was not always accessible to everyone. In Canada, before the 1910s, camping was reserved only for men. [22] The first camping ground to be established in a National Park in Canada was in 1964 at the Lake Louise . [21] According to data by a study made by Camping Québec in 2016, 20% of the province of Québec did go camping, that being about 1,600,000 people. [23] In the same research, the study has shown that a certain 8% of those campers were strangers. [23] The popularity of camping in Canada is not only for locals but also for travelers. About 34% of the camp fanatics in Québec are camping on either National Parks or Provincials Parks . [23] Australia[ edit ] According to the Australian government , camping and caravan holds a special place in the hearts of many Australians , as it offers a unique opportunity to connect with the country's diverse natural landscapes and rich outdoor heritage. Australia benefits from a favorable climate and an expansive array of camping grounds and sites throughout the country. [24] Before the onset of COVID-19 , there was a notable 67% increase in the number of caravan and camping trips over the preceding decade. In the year concluding in 2019, Australians embarked on a record-breaking 13.9 million caravan and camping journeys. Of these excursions, commercial caravan parks and camping grounds contributed to 52% of trips, 62% of nights spent, and 64% of total expenditure. Since the lifting of COVID-related restrictions, there has been a strong rebound in numbers. By the conclusion of the year in June 2022, trips had reached 12.7 million, while spending surged to an unprecedented $10.5 billion. With over 770,000 caravan and campervan registrations nationwide in 2021, this upward trend is poised to persist. [24] Camping and public access[ edit ] Camping on open land, regardless of ownership, is legal in a few countries, including Sweden and Scotland. In Sweden, a right of public access – allowing outdoor recreational activity on privately held wilderness – is enshrined in the constitution. [25] Large groups, however, must obtain the landowner's permission. [26] In Scotland, people may camp on most unenclosed land, whether state- or privately owned. There is however a "leave-no-trace" policy and a common-law outdoor-access code. [27] [28] In popular culture[ edit ] Many films and other media have focused on camping or portrayed events regarding camping. Music includes the c. 1962 Phil Ochs album, Camp Favorites .
A hostel in Queenstown , New Zealand Traveling internationally for long periods of time on a tight budget. [1] Willingness to forgo luxury, suffer hardships, and be resourceful in order to make such a journey possible. [1] Traveling via public transport or hitchhiking , using inexpensive lodging such as hostels or homestays , and other methods of lowering costs. A longer duration trip when compared with conventional vacations. [1] Working in other countries for short stints, depending on work permit laws. It can also be undertaken by digital nomads , people who work using technology while living a nomadic lifestyle. A search for authenticity . Backpacking is perceived not only as a form of tourism but as a means of education. Backpackers want to experience what they consider the "real" destination rather than a packaged version often associated with mass tourism. The desire to take part in or craft a narrative around traveling. An interest in personal growth and discovery, as well as a desire to experience new culture, meet new people and foster a new perspective on the world. This is more significant considering that many backpackers are at a transitional point in their lives; such as between education and employment. [1] Bunk beds in a hostel in Zürich History[ edit ] People have travelled for thousands of years with their possessions on their backs, but usually out of need rather than for recreation. Between 3400 and 3100 BCE, Ötzi the Iceman was traveling in Italy with a backpack made of animal skins and a wooden frame, although there are some thoughts that this may actually have been his snowshoes.[ citation needed ] In the 7th century, Xuanzang , a Chinese Buddhist monk, travelled to India with a hand-made backpack.[ citation needed ] In the 17th century, Italian adventurer Giovanni Francesco Gemelli Careri was likely one of the first people to engage in backpacker tourism. [4] The modern popularity of backpacking can be traced, at least partially, to the hippie trail of the 1960s and 1970s, [5] which in turn followed sections of the old Silk Road . Some backpackers follow the same trail today. [6] Since the late-20th century, backpackers have visited Southeast Asia in large numbers. Benefits[ edit ] A 2018 study of over 500 backpackers conducted by researchers at Sun Yat-sen University and Shaanxi Normal University in China and Edith Cowan University in Australia showed that for Westerners, backpacking leads to acquired capabilities like effective communication, decision-making , adaptability , and problem solving , all of which contribute to an increase in self-efficacy , and for Chinese backpackers, acquiring skills like time and money management , language development, stress management , and self-motivation provided the biggest increase in self-efficacy. [7] [8] Mark Hampton of the University of Kent , writing for The Guardian , argued in 2010 that for many low-income communities in the developing world, the economic benefits of hosting backpackers outweigh their negative impacts. Since backpackers tend to consume local products, stay in small guest houses, and use locally owned ground transport, more of their expenditure is retained in-country than in conventional mass tourism. [9] Criticism[ edit ] Backpacker tourism of the hippie trail has been criticized for possibly encouraging urban liberal minorities while insulting Islamic traditionalist theology , possibly leading to the Islamic reawakening in the late 1970s. [10] [11] Even though one of the primary aims of backpacking is to seek the "authentic", the majority of backpackers spend most of their time interacting with other backpackers, and interactions with locals are of "secondary importance". [5] Backpacker tourism has been criticized for the transformation of some sleepy towns, such as the creation of the Full Moon Party on Ko Pha-ngan in Thailand , which includes "scores of topless teenagers urinating into the ocean". [12] Backpackers in Vienna Variants[ edit ] Flashpacking and Poshpacking refer to backpacking with more money and resources. The words combine backpacking with flash, a slang term for being fancy, or posh, an informal adjective for upper class . Begpacking combines begging and backpacking in reference to individuals who beg (ask directly or indirectly for money), solicit money during street performances , or vend (sell postcards or other small items) as a way to extend their overseas travel. [13] The trend has drawn criticism for taking money away from people in actual need, with one known begpacker barred from entering Singapore . [14] [15] Begpacking is common in Southeast Asia and is a trend in South America and South Korea. [16] [17]
Toggle the table of contents Philosophy From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of general and fundamental questions The statue The Thinker by Auguste Rodin is a symbol of philosophical thought. [1] Part of a series on e Philosophy (φιλοσοφία, 'love of wisdom', in Ancient Greek ) is a systematic study of general and fundamental questions concerning topics like existence , reason , knowledge , value , mind , and language . It is a rational and critical inquiry that reflects on its own methods and assumptions. Historically, many of the individual sciences , such as physics and psychology , formed part of philosophy. However, they are considered separate academic disciplines in the modern sense of the term. Influential traditions in the history of philosophy include Western , Arabic–Persian , Indian , and Chinese philosophy . Western philosophy originated in Ancient Greece and covers a wide area of philosophical subfields. A central topic in Arabic–Persian philosophy is the relation between reason and revelation . Indian philosophy combines the spiritual problem of how to reach enlightenment with the exploration of the nature of reality and the ways of arriving at knowledge. Chinese philosophy focuses principally on practical issues in relation to right social conduct, government, and self-cultivation . Major branches of philosophy are epistemology , ethics , logic , and metaphysics . Epistemology studies what knowledge is and how to acquire it. Ethics investigates moral principles and what constitutes right conduct. Logic is the study of correct reasoning and explores how good arguments can be distinguished from bad ones. Metaphysics examines the most general features of reality , existence, objects , and properties . Other subfields are aesthetics , philosophy of language , philosophy of mind , philosophy of religion , philosophy of science , philosophy of mathematics , philosophy of history , and political philosophy . Within each branch, there are competing schools of philosophy that promote different principles, theories, or methods. Philosophers use a great variety of methods to arrive at philosophical knowledge. They include conceptual analysis , reliance on common sense and intuitions , use of thought experiments , analysis of ordinary language , description of experience , and critical questioning . Philosophy is related to many other fields, including the sciences, mathematics , business , law , and journalism . It provides an interdisciplinary perspective and studies the scope and fundamental concepts of these fields. It also investigates their methods and ethical implications. Etymology The word philosophy comes from the Ancient Greek words φίλος (philos) 'love' and σοφία (sophia) 'wisdom'. [2] [a] Some sources say that the term was coined by the pre-Socratic philosopher Pythagoras , but this is not certain. [4] Physics was originally part of philosophy, like Isaac Newton 's observation of how gravity affects falling apples . The word entered the English language primarily from Old French and Anglo-Norman starting around 1175 CE. The French philosophie is itself a borrowing from the Latin philosophia. The term philosophy acquired the meanings of "advanced study of the speculative subjects ( logic , ethics , physics , and metaphysics )", "deep wisdom consisting of love of truth and virtuous living", "profound learning as transmitted by the ancient writers", and "the study of the fundamental nature of knowledge , reality , and existence , and the basic limits of human understanding". [5] Before the modern age, the term philosophy was used in a wide sense. It included most forms of rational inquiry, such as the individual sciences , as its subdisciplines. [6] For instance, natural philosophy was a major branch of philosophy. [7] This branch of philosophy encompassed a wide range of fields, including disciplines like physics, chemistry , and biology . [8] An example of this usage is the 1687 book Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica by Isaac Newton . This book referred to natural philosophy in its title, but it is today considered a book of physics. [9] The meaning of philosophy changed toward the end of the modern period when it acquired the more narrow meaning common today. In this new sense, the term is mainly associated with philosophical disciplines like metaphysics, epistemology, and ethics. Among other topics, it covers the rational study of reality, knowledge, and values. It is distinguished from other disciplines of rational inquiry such as the empirical sciences and mathematics . [10] Conceptions of philosophy See also: Metaphilosophy General conception The practice of philosophy is characterized by several general features: it is a form of rational inquiry, it aims to be systematic, and it tends to critically reflect on its own methods and presuppositions. [11] It requires attentively thinking long and carefully about the provocative, vexing, and enduring problems central to the human condition. [12] The philosophical pursuit of wisdom involves asking general and fundamental questions. It often does not result in straightforward answers but may help a person to better understand the topic, examine their life, dispel confusion, and overcome prejudices and self-deceptive ideas associated with common sense. [13] For example, Socrates stated that " the unexamined life is not worth living " to highlight the role of philosophical inquiry in understanding one's own existence. [14] [15] And according to Bertrand Russell , "the man who has no tincture of philosophy goes through life imprisoned in the prejudices derived from common sense, from the habitual beliefs of his age or his nation, and from convictions which have grown up in his mind without the cooperation or consent of his deliberate reason." [16] Academic definitions Main article: Definitions of philosophy Attempts to provide more precise definitions of philosophy are controversial [17] and are studied in metaphilosophy . [18] Some approaches argue that there is a set of essential features shared by all parts of philosophy. Others see only weaker family resemblances or contend that it is merely an empty blanket term. [19] Precise definitions are often only accepted by theorists belonging to a certain philosophical movement and are revisionistic according to Søren Overgaard et al. in that many presumed parts of philosophy would not deserve the title "philosophy" if they were true. [20] Some definitions characterize philosophy in relation to its method, like pure reasoning. Others focus on its topic, for example, as the study of the biggest patterns of the world as a whole or as the attempt to answer the big questions. [21] Such an approach is pursued by Immanuel Kant , who holds that the task of philosophy is united by four questions: "What can I know?"; "What should I do?"; "What may I hope?"; and "What is the human being?" [22] Both approaches have the problem that they are usually either too wide, by including non-philosophical disciplines, or too narrow, by excluding some philosophical sub-disciplines. [23] Many definitions of philosophy emphasize its intimate relation to science. [24] In this sense, philosophy is sometimes understood as a proper science in its own right. According to some naturalistic philosophers , such as W. V. O. Quine , philosophy is an empirical yet abstract science that is concerned with wide-ranging empirical patterns instead of particular observations. [25] Science-based definitions usually face the problem of explaining why philosophy in its long history has not progressed to the same extent or in the same way as the sciences. [26] This problem is avoided by seeing philosophy as an immature or provisional science whose subdisciplines cease to be philosophy once they have fully developed. [27] In this sense, philosophy is sometimes described as "the midwife of the sciences". [28] Other definitions focus on the contrast between science and philosophy. A common theme among many such conceptions is that philosophy is concerned with meaning , understanding , or the clarification of language. [29] According to one view, philosophy is conceptual analysis , which involves finding the necessary and sufficient conditions for the application of concepts. [30] Another definition characterizes philosophy as thinking about thinking to emphasize its self-critical, reflective nature. [31] A further approach presents philosophy as a linguistic therapy. According to Ludwig Wittgenstein , for instance, philosophy aims at dispelling misunderstandings to which humans are susceptible due to the confusing structure of ordinary language . [32] Phenomenologists , such as Edmund Husserl , characterize philosophy as a "rigorous science" investigating essences . [33] They practice a radical suspension of theoretical assumptions about reality to get back to the "things themselves", that is, as originally given in experience. They contend that this base-level of experience provides the foundation for higher-order theoretical knowledge, and that one needs to understand the former to understand the latter. [34] An early approach found in ancient Greek and Roman philosophy is that philosophy is the spiritual practice of developing one's rational capacities. [35] This practice is an expression of the philosopher's love of wisdom and has the aim of improving one's well-being by leading a reflective life. [36] For example, the Stoics saw philosophy as an exercise to train the mind and thereby achieve eudaimonia and flourish in life. [37] History Main article: History of philosophy As a discipline, the history of philosophy aims to provide a systematic and chronological exposition of philosophical concepts and doctrines. [38] Some theorists see it as a part of intellectual history , but it also investigates questions not covered by intellectual history such as whether the theories of past philosophers are true and have remained philosophically relevant. [39] The history of philosophy is primarily concerned with theories based on rational inquiry and argumentation; some historians understand it in a looser sense that includes myths , religious teachings , and proverbial lore. [40] Influential traditions in the history of philosophy include Western , Arabic–Persian , Indian , and Chinese philosophy . Other philosophical traditions are Japanese philosophy , Latin American philosophy , and African philosophy . [41] Western Main article: Western philosophy Aristotle was a major figure in ancient philosophy and developed a comprehensive system of thought including metaphysics, logic, ethics, politics, and natural science. [42] Western philosophy originated in Ancient Greece in the 6th century BCE with the pre-Socratics . They attempted to provide rational explanations of the cosmos as a whole. [43] The philosophy following them was shaped by Socrates (469–399 BCE), Plato (427–347 BCE), and Aristotle (384–322 BCE). They expanded the range of topics to questions like how people should act , how to arrive at knowledge , and what the nature of reality and mind is. [44] The later part of the ancient period was marked by the emergence of philosophical movements, for example, Epicureanism , Stoicism , Skepticism , and Neoplatonism . [45] The medieval period started in the 5th century CE. Its focus was on religious topics and many thinkers used ancient philosophy to explain and further elaborate Christian doctrines . [46] [47] The Renaissance period started in the 14th century and saw a renewed interest in schools of ancient philosophy, in particular Platonism . Humanism also emerged in this period. [48] The modern period started in the 17th century. One of its central concerns was how philosophical and scientific knowledge are created. Specific importance was given to the role of reason and sensory experience . [49] Many of these innovations were used in the Enlightenment movement to challenge traditional authorities. [50] Several attempts to develop comprehensive systems of philosophy were made in the 19th century, for instance, by German idealism and Marxism . [51] Influential developments in 20th-century philosophy were the emergence and application of formal logic , the focus on the role of language as well as pragmatism , and movements in continental philosophy like phenomenology, existentialism , and post-structuralism . [52] The 20th century saw a rapid expansion of academic philosophy in terms of the number of philosophical publications and philosophers working at academic institutions . [53] There was also a noticeable growth in the number of female philosophers , but they still remained underrepresented. [54] Arabic–Persian Main articles: Islamic philosophy and Iranian philosophy Portrait of Avicenna on a silver vase. He was one of the most influential philosophers of the Islamic Golden Age . Arabic–Persian philosophy arose in the early 9th century CE as a response to discussions in the Islamic theological tradition . Its classical period lasted until the 12th century CE and was strongly influenced by ancient Greek philosophers. It employed their ideas to elaborate and interpret the teachings of the Quran . [55] Al-Kindi (801–873 CE) is usually regarded as the first philosopher of this tradition. He translated and interpreted many works of Aristotle and Neoplatonists in his attempt to show that there is a harmony between reason and faith . [56] Avicenna (980–1037 CE) also followed this goal and developed a comprehensive philosophical system to provide a rational understanding of reality encompassing science, religion, and mysticism. [57] Al-Ghazali (1058–1111 CE) was a strong critic of the idea that reason can arrive at a true understanding of reality and God. He formulated a detailed critique of philosophy and tried to assign philosophy a more limited place besides the teachings of the Quran and mystical insight. [58] Following Al-Ghazali and the end of the classical period, the influence of philosophical inquiry waned. [59] Mulla Sadra (1571–1636 CE) is often regarded as one of the most influential philosophers of the subsequent period. [60] The increasing influence of Western thought and institutions in the 19th and 20th centuries gave rise to the intellectual movement of Islamic modernism , which aims to understand the relation between traditional Islamic beliefs and modernity. [61] Indian Main article: Indian philosophy One of the distinguishing features of Indian philosophy is that it integrates the exploration of the nature of reality, the ways of arriving at knowledge, and the spiritual question of how to reach enlightenment . [62] It started around 900 BCE when the Vedas were written. They are the foundational scriptures of Hinduism and contemplate issues concerning the relation between the self and ultimate reality as well as the question of how souls are reborn based on their past actions . [63] This period also saw the emergence of non-Vedic teachings, like Buddhism and Jainism . [64] Buddhism was founded by Gautama Siddhartha (563–483 BCE), who challenged the Vedic idea of a permanent self and proposed a path to liberate oneself from suffering . [64] Jainism was founded by Mahavira (599–527 BCE), who emphasized non-violence as well as respect toward all forms of life. [65] The subsequent classical period started roughly 200 BCE [b] and was characterized by the emergence of the six orthodox schools of Hinduism : Nyāyá , Vaiśeṣika , Sāṃkhya , Yoga , Mīmāṃsā , and Vedanta . [67] The school of Advaita Vedanta developed later in this period. It was systematized by Adi Shankara ( c. 700–750 CE), who held that everything is one and that the impression of a universe consisting of many distinct entities is an illusion . [68] A slightly different perspective was defended by Ramanuja (1017–1137 CE), [c] who founded the school of Vishishtadvaita Vedanta and argued that individual entities are real as aspects or parts of the underlying unity. [70] He also helped to popularize the Bhakti movement , which taught devotion toward the divine as a spiritual path and lasted until the 17th to 18th centuries CE. [71] The modern period began roughly 1800 CE and was shaped by encounters with Western thought. [72] Philosophers tried to formulate comprehensive systems to harmonize diverse philosophical and religious teachings. For example, Swami Vivekananda (1863–1902 CE) used the teachings of Advaita Vedanta to argue that all the different religions are valid paths toward the one divine. [73] Chinese Main article: Chinese philosophy The teachings of Confucius on ethics and society shaped subsequent Chinese philosophy. Chinese philosophy is particularly interested in practical questions associated with right social conduct, government, and self-cultivation . [74] Many schools of thought emerged in the 6th century BCE in competing attempts to resolve the political turbulence of that period. The most prominent among them were Confucianism and Daoism . [75] Confucianism was founded by Confucius (551–479 BCE). It focused on different forms of moral virtues and explored how they lead to harmony in society. [76] Daoism was founded by Laozi (6th century BCE) and examined how humans can live in harmony with nature by following the Dao or the natural order of the universe. [77] Other influential early schools of thought were Mohism , which developed an early form of altruistic consequentialism , [78] and Legalism , which emphasized the importance of a strong state and strict laws. [79] Buddhism was introduced to China in the 1st century CE and diversified into new forms of Buddhism . [80] Starting in the 3rd century CE, the school of Xuanxue emerged. It interpreted earlier Daoist works with a specific emphasis on metaphysical explanations. [80] Neo-Confucianism developed in the 11th century CE. It systematized previous Confucian teachings and sought a metaphysical foundation of ethics. [81] The modern period in Chinese philosophy began in the early 20th century and was shaped by the influence of and reactions to Western philosophy. The emergence of Chinese Marxism —which focused on class struggle , socialism , and communism —resulted in a significant transformation of the political landscape. [82] Another development was the emergence of New Confucianism , which aims to modernize and rethink Confucian teachings to explore their compatibility with democratic ideals and modern science. [83] Other traditions Traditional Japanese philosophy assimilated and synthesized ideas from different traditions, including the indigenous Shinto religion and Chinese and Indian thought in the forms of Confucianism and Buddhism, both of which entered Japan in the 6th and 7th centuries. Its practice is characterized by active interaction with reality rather than disengaged examination. [84] Neo-Confucianism became an influential school of thought in the 16th century and the following Edo period and prompted a greater focus on language and the natural world. [85] The Kyoto School emerged in the 20th century and integrated Eastern spirituality with Western philosophy in its exploration of concepts like absolute nothingness (zettai-mu), place (basho), and the self . [86] Latin American philosophy in the pre-colonial period was practiced by indigenous civilizations and explored questions concerning the nature of reality and the role of humans. [87] It has similarities to indigenous North American philosophy , which covered themes such as the interconnectedness of all things. [88] Latin American philosophy during the colonial period , starting around 1550, was dominated by religious philosophy in the form of scholasticism . Influential topics in the post-colonial period were positivism , the philosophy of liberation , and the exploration of identity and culture. [89] Early African philosophy, like Ubuntu philosophy , was focused on community, morality, and ancestral ideas. [90] Systematic African philosophy emerged at the beginning of the 20th century. It discusses topics such as ethnophilosophy , négritude , pan-Africanism , Marxism, postcolonialism , the role of cultural identity, and the critique of Eurocentrism . [91] Core branches See also: Outline of philosophy § Branches of philosophy , and Outline of philosophy § Philosophical schools of thought Philosophical questions can be grouped into several branches. These groupings allow philosophers to focus on a set of similar topics and interact with other thinkers who are interested in the same questions. Epistemology, ethics, logic, and metaphysics are sometimes listed as the main branches. [92] There are many other subfields besides them and the different divisions are neither exhaustive nor mutually exclusive. For example, political philosophy, ethics, and aesthetics are sometimes linked under the general heading of value theory as they investigate normative or evaluative aspects. [93] Furthermore, philosophical inquiry sometimes overlaps with other disciplines in the natural and social sciences, religion, and mathematics. [94] Epistemology Main article: Epistemology Epistemology is the branch of philosophy that studies knowledge. It is also known as theory of knowledge and aims to understand what knowledge is, how it arises, what its limits are, and what value it has. It further examines the nature of truth , belief , justification , and rationality . [95] Some of the questions addressed by epistemologists include "By what method(s) can one acquire knowledge?"; "How is truth established?"; and "Can we prove causal relations?" [96] Epistemology is primarily interested in declarative knowledge or knowledge of facts, like knowing that Princess Diana died in 1997. But it also investigates practical knowledge , such as knowing how to ride a bicycle, and knowledge by acquaintance , for example, knowing a celebrity personally. [97] One area in epistemology is the analysis of knowledge . It assumes that declarative knowledge is a combination of different parts and attempts to identify what those parts are. An influential theory in this area claims that knowledge has three components: it is a belief that is justified and true. This theory is controversial and the difficulties associated with it are known as the Gettier problem . [98] Alternative views state that knowledge requires additional components, like the absence of luck; different components, like the manifestation of cognitive virtues instead of justification; or they deny that knowledge can be analyzed in terms of other phenomena. [99] Another area in epistemology asks how people acquire knowledge. Often-discussed sources of knowledge are perception , introspection , memory , inference , and testimony . [100] According to empiricists , all knowledge is based on some form of experience. Rationalists reject this view and hold that some forms of knowledge, like innate knowledge , are not acquired through experience. [101] The regress problem is a common issue in relation to the sources of knowledge and the justification they offer. It is based on the idea that beliefs require some kind of reason or evidence to be justified. The problem is that the source of justification may itself be in need of another source of justification. This leads to an infinite regress or circular reasoning . Foundationalists avoid this conclusion by arguing that some sources can provide justification without requiring justification themselves. [102] Another solution is presented by coherentists , who state that a belief is justified if it coheres with other beliefs of the person. [103] Many discussions in epistemology touch on the topic of philosophical skepticism , which raises doubts about some or all claims to knowledge. These doubts are often based on the idea that knowledge requires absolute certainty and that humans are unable to acquire it. [104] Ethics Main article: Ethics "The utilitarian doctrine is, that happiness is desirable, and the only thing desirable, as an end; all other things being only desirable as means to that end." — John Stuart Mill , Utilitarianism (1863) [105] Ethics, also known as moral philosophy, studies what constitutes right conduct . It is also concerned with the moral evaluation of character traits and institutions. It explores what the standards of morality are and how to live a good life. [106] Philosophical ethics addresses such basic questions as "Are moral obligations relative?"; "Which has priority: well-being or obligation?"; and "What gives life meaning?" [107] The main branches of ethics are meta-ethics , normative ethics , and applied ethics . [108] Meta-ethics asks abstract questions about the nature and sources of morality. It analyzes the meaning of ethical concepts, like right action and obligation . It also investigates whether ethical theories can be true in an absolute sense and how to acquire knowledge of them. [109] Normative ethics encompasses general theories of how to distinguish between right and wrong conduct. It helps guide moral decisions by examining what moral obligations and rights people have. Applied ethics studies the consequences of the general theories developed by normative ethics in specific situations, for example, in the workplace or for medical treatments. [110] Within contemporary normative ethics, consequentialism, deontology , and virtue ethics are influential schools of thought. [111] Consequentialists judge actions based on their consequences. One such view is utilitarianism , which argues that actions should increase overall happiness while minimizing suffering. Deontologists judge actions based on whether they follow moral duties, such as abstaining from lying or killing. According to them, what matters is that actions are in tune with those duties and not what consequences they have. Virtue theorists judge actions based on how the moral character of the agent is expressed. According to this view, actions should conform to what an ideally virtuous agent would do by manifesting virtues like generosity and honesty . [112] Logic Main article: Logic Logic is the study of correct reasoning . It aims to understand how to distinguish good from bad arguments . [113] It is usually divided into formal and informal logic . Formal logic uses artificial languages with a precise symbolic representation to investigate arguments. In its search for exact criteria, it examines the structure of arguments to determine whether they are correct or incorrect. Informal logic uses non-formal criteria and standards to assess the correctness of arguments. It relies on additional factors such as content and context. [114] Logic examines a variety of arguments. Deductive arguments are mainly studied by formal logic. An argument is deductively valid if the truth of its premises ensures the truth of its conclusion. Deductively valid arguments follow a rule of inference , like modus ponens , which has the following logical form : "p; if p then q; therefore q". An example is the argument "today is Sunday; if today is Sunday then I don't have to go to work today; therefore I don't have to go to work today". [115] The premises of non-deductive arguments also support their conclusion, although this support does not guarantee that the conclusion is true. [116] One form is inductive reasoning . It starts from a set of individual cases and uses generalization to arrive at a universal law governing all cases. An example is the inference that "all ravens are black" based on observations of many individual black ravens. [117] Another form is abductive reasoning . It starts from an observation and concludes that the best explanation of this observation must be true. This happens, for example, when a doctor diagnoses a disease based on the observed symptoms. [118] Logic also investigates incorrect forms of reasoning. They are called fallacies and are divided into formal and informal fallacies based on whether the source of the error lies only in the form of the argument or also in its content and context. [119] Metaphysics Main article: Metaphysics The beginning of Aristotle's Metaphysics in an incunabulum decorated with hand-painted miniatures. Metaphysics is the study of the most general features of reality , such as existence, objects and their properties , wholes and their parts , space and time , events , and causation . [120] There are disagreements about the precise definition of the term and its meaning has changed throughout the ages. [121] Metaphysicians attempt to answer basic questions including " Why is there something rather than nothing? "; "Of what does reality ultimately consist?"; and "Are humans free?" [122] Metaphysics is sometimes divided into general metaphysics and specific or special metaphysics. General metaphysics investigates being as such. It examines the features that all entities have in common. Specific metaphysics is interested in different kinds of being, the features they have, and how they differ from one another. [123] An important area in metaphysics is ontology . Some theorists identify it with general metaphysics. Ontology investigates concepts like being , becoming , and reality. It studies the categories of being and asks what exists on the most fundamental level. [124] Another subfield of metaphysics is philosophical cosmology . It is interested in the essence of the world as a whole. It asks questions including whether the universe has a beginning and an end and whether it was created by something else. [125] A key topic in metaphysics concerns the question of whether reality only consists of physical things like matter and energy. Alternative suggestions are that mental entities (such as souls and experiences ) and abstract entities (such as numbers) exist apart from physical things. Another topic in metaphysics concerns the problem of identity . One question is how much an entity can change while still remaining the same entity. [126] According to one view, entities have essential and accidental features . They can change their accidental features but they cease to be the same entity if they lose an essential feature. [127] A central distinction in metaphysics is between particulars and universals . Universals, like the color red, can exist at different locations at the same time. This is not the case for particulars including individual persons or specific objects. [128] Other metaphysical questions are whether the past fully determines the present and what implications this would have for the existence of free will . [129] Other major branches See also: List of philosophies There are many other subfields of philosophy besides its core branches. Some of the most prominent are aesthetics, philosophy of language, philosophy of mind, philosophy of religion, philosophy of science, and political philosophy. [130] Aesthetics in the philosophical sense is the field that studies the nature and appreciation of beauty and other aesthetic properties, like the sublime . [131] Although it is often treated together with the philosophy of art , aesthetics is a broader category that encompasses other aspects of experience, such as natural beauty. [132] In a more general sense, aesthetics is "critical reflection on art, culture, and nature ". [133] A key question in aesthetics is whether beauty is an objective feature of entities or a subjective aspect of experience. [134] Aesthetic philosophers also investigate the nature of aesthetic experiences and judgments . Further topics include the essence of works of art and the processes involved in creating them. [135] The philosophy of language studies the nature and function of language . It examines the concepts of meaning , reference , and truth. It aims to answer questions such as how words are related to things and how language affects human thought and understanding. It is closely related to the disciplines of logic and linguistics. [136] The philosophy of language rose to particular prominence in the early 20th century in analytic philosophy due to the works of Frege and Russell. One of its central topics is to understand how sentences get their meaning. There are two broad theoretical camps: those emphasizing the formal truth conditions of sentences [d] and those investigating circumstances that determine when it is suitable to use a sentence, the latter of which is associated with speech act theory . [138] The philosophy of mind studies the nature of mental phenomena and how they are related to the physical world. [139] It aims to understand different types of conscious and unconscious mental states , like beliefs , desires , intentions , feelings , sensations , and free will. [140] An influential intuition in the philosophy of mind is that there is a distinction between the inner experience of objects and their existence in the external world. The mind-body problem is the problem of explaining how these two types of thing—mind and matter—are related. The main traditional responses are materialism , which assumes that matter is more fundamental; idealism , which assumes that mind is more fundamental; and dualism , which assumes that mind and matter are distinct types of entities. In contemporary philosophy, another common view is functionalism , which understands mental states in terms of the functional or causal roles they play. [141] The mind-body problem is closely related to the hard problem of consciousness , which asks how the physical brain can produce qualitatively subjective experiences. [142] The philosophy of religion investigates the basic concepts, assumptions, and arguments associated with religion . It critically reflects on what religion is, how to define the divine , and whether one or more gods exist. It also includes the discussion of worldviews that reject religious doctrines. [143] Further questions addressed by the philosophy of religion are: "How are we to interpret religious language, if not literally?"; [144] "Is divine omniscience compatible with free will?"; [145] and, "Are the great variety of world religions in some way compatible in spite of their apparently contradictory theological claims?" [146] It includes topics from nearly all branches of philosophy. [147] It differs from theology since theological debates typically take place within one religious tradition, whereas debates in the philosophy of religion transcend any particular set of theological assumptions. [148] The philosophy of science examines the fundamental concepts, assumptions, and problems associated with science. It reflects on what science is and how to distinguish it from pseudoscience . It investigates the methods employed by scientists, how their application can result in knowledge, and on what assumptions they are based. It also studies the purpose and implications of science. [149] Some of its questions are "What counts as an adequate explanation?"; [150] "Is a scientific law anything more than a description of a regularity?"; [151] and "Can some special sciences be explained entirely in the terms of a more general science?" [152] It is a vast field that is commonly divided into the philosophy of the natural sciences and the philosophy of the social sciences , with further subdivisions for each of the individual sciences under these headings. How these branches are related to one another is also a question in the philosophy of science. Many of its philosophical issues overlap with the fields of metaphysics or epistemology. [153] Political philosophy is the philosophical inquiry into the fundamental principles and ideas governing political systems and societies. It examines the basic concepts, assumptions, and arguments in the field of politics . It investigates the nature and purpose of government and compares its different forms. [154] It further asks under what circumstances the use of political power is legitimate , rather than a form of simple violence. [155] In this regard, it is concerned with the distribution of political power, social and material goods, and legal rights . [156] Other topics are justice , liberty , equality , sovereignty , and nationalism . [157] Political philosophy involves a general inquiry into normative matters and differs in this respect from political science , which aims to provide empirical descriptions of actually existing states. [158] Political philosophy is often treated as a subfield of ethics. [159] Influential schools of thought in political philosophy are liberalism , conservativism , socialism, and anarchism . [160] Methods Main article: Philosophical methodology Methods of philosophy are ways of conducting philosophical inquiry. They include techniques for arriving at philosophical knowledge and justifying philosophical claims as well as principles used for choosing between competing theories. [161] A great variety of methods have been employed throughout the history of philosophy. Many of them differ significantly from the methods used in the natural sciences in that they do not use experimental data obtained through measuring equipment. [162] The choice of one's method usually has important implications both for how philosophical theories are constructed and for the arguments cited for or against them. [163] This choice is often guided by epistemological considerations about what constitutes philosophical evidence . [164] Methodological disagreements can cause conflicts among philosophical theories or about the answers to philosophical questions. The discovery of new methods has often had important consequences both for how philosophers conduct their research and for what claims they defend. [165] Some philosophers engage in most of their theorizing using one particular method while others employ a wider range of methods based on which one fits the specific problem investigated best. [166] Conceptual analysis is a common method in analytic philosophy. It aims to clarify the meaning of concepts by analyzing them into their component parts. [167] Another method often employed in analytic philosophy is based on common sense . It starts with commonly accepted beliefs and tries to draw unexpected conclusions from them, which it often employs in a negative sense to criticize philosophical theories that are too far removed from how the average person sees the issue. [168] It is similar to how ordinary language philosophy approaches philosophical questions by investigating how ordinary language is used. [169] The trolley problem is a thought experiment that investigates the moral difference between doing and allowing harm. This issue is explored in an imaginary situation in which a person can sacrifice a single person by redirecting a trolley to save a group of people. [170] Various methods in philosophy give particular importance to intuitions , that is, non-inferential impressions about the correctness of specific claims or general principles. [171] For example, they play an important role in thought experiments , which employ counterfactual thinking to evaluate the possible consequences of an imagined situation. These anticipated consequences can then be used to confirm or refute philosophical theories. [172] The method of reflective equilibrium also employs intuitions. It seeks to form a coherent position on a certain issue by examining all the relevant beliefs and intuitions, some of which often have to be deemphasized or reformulated to arrive at a coherent perspective. [173] Pragmatists stress the significance of concrete practical consequences for assessing whether a philosophical theory is true. [174] According to the pragmatic maxim as formulated by Charles Sanders Peirce , the idea a person has of an object is nothing more than the totality of practical consequences they associate with this object. Pragmatists have also used this method to expose disagreements as merely verbal, that is, to show they make no genuine difference on the level of consequences. [175] Phenomenologists seek knowledge of the realm of appearance and the structure of human experience. They insist upon the first-personal character of all experience and proceed by suspending theoretical judgments about the external world. This technique of phenomenological reduction is known as "bracketing" or epoché . The goal is to give an unbiased description of the appearances of things. [176] Methodological naturalism places great emphasis on the empirical approach and the resulting theories found in the natural sciences. In this way, it contrasts with methodologies that give more weight to pure reasoning and introspection. [177] Relation to other fields Philosophy is closely related to many other fields. It is sometimes understood as a metadiscipline that clarifies their nature and limits. It does this by critically examining their basic concepts, background assumptions, and methods. In this regard, it plays a key role in providing an interdisciplinary perspective. It bridges the gap between different disciplines by analyzing which concepts and problems they have in common. It shows how they overlap while also delimiting their scope. [178] Historically, most of the individual sciences originated from philosophy. [179] The influence of philosophy is felt in several fields that require difficult practical decisions. In medicine , philosophical considerations related to bioethics affect issues like whether an embryo is already a person and under what conditions abortion is morally permissible. A closely related philosophical problem is how humans should treat other animals, for instance, whether it is acceptable to use non-human animals as food or for research experiments . [180] In relation to business and professional life, philosophy has contributed by providing ethical frameworks. They contain guidelines on which business practices are morally acceptable and cover the issue of corporate social responsibility . [181] Philosophical inquiry is relevant to many fields that are concerned with what to believe and how to arrive at evidence for one's beliefs. [182] This is a key issue for the sciences, which have as one of their prime objectives the creation of scientific knowledge. Scientific knowledge is based on empirical evidence but it is often not clear whether empirical observations are neutral or already include theoretical assumptions . A closely connected problem is whether the available evidence is sufficient to decide between competing theories. [183] Epistemological problems in relation to the law include what counts as evidence and how much evidence is required to find a person guilty of a crime. A related issue in journalism is how to ensure truth and objectivity when reporting on events. [178] In the fields of theology and religion, there are many doctrines associated with the existence and nature of God as well as rules governing correct behavior. A key issue is whether a rational person should believe these doctrines, for example, whether revelation in the form of holy books and religious experiences of the divine are sufficient evidence for these beliefs. [184] Judith Butler is one of the philosophers responsible for the cultural influence of philosophy on the feminist movement. Philosophy in the form of logic has been influential in the fields of mathematics and computer science . [185] Further fields influenced by philosophy include psychology , sociology , linguistics, education , and the arts . [186] The close relation between philosophy and other fields in the contemporary period is reflected in the fact that many philosophy graduates go on to work in related fields rather than in philosophy itself. [187] In the field of politics, philosophy addresses issues such as how to assess whether a government policy is just. [188] Philosophical ideas have prepared and shaped various political developments. For example, ideals formulated in Enlightenment philosophy laid the foundation for constitutional democracy and played a role in the American Revolution and the French Revolution . [189] Marxist philosophy and its exposition of communism was one of the factors in the Russian Revolution and the Chinese Communist Revolution . [190] In India, Mahatma Gandhi 's philosophy of non-violence shaped the Indian independence movement . [191] An example of the cultural and critical role of philosophy is found in its influence on the feminist movement through philosophers such as Mary Wollstonecraft , Simone de Beauvoir , and Judith Butler . It has shaped the understanding of key concepts in feminism, for instance, the meaning of gender , how it differs from biological sex , and what role it plays in the formation of personal identity . Philosophers have also investigated the concepts of justice and equality and their implications with respect to the prejudicial treatment of women in male-dominated societies . [192] The idea that philosophy is useful for many aspects of life and society is sometimes rejected. According to one such view, philosophy is mainly undertaken for its own sake and does not make significant contributions to existing practices or external goals. [193] See also
Toggle the table of contents Psychology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of mental functions and behaviors For other uses, see Psychology (disambiguation) . Part of a series on e Psychology is the study of mind and behavior . [1] Its subject matter includes the behavior of humans and nonhumans, both conscious and unconscious phenomena, and mental processes such as thoughts , feelings , and motives . Psychology is an academic discipline of immense scope, crossing the boundaries between the natural and social sciences . Biological psychologists seek an understanding of the emergent properties of brains, linking the discipline to neuroscience . As social scientists, psychologists aim to understand the behavior of individuals and groups. [2] [3] A professional practitioner or researcher involved in the discipline is called a psychologist . Some psychologists can also be classified as behavioral or cognitive scientists . Some psychologists attempt to understand the role of mental functions in individual and social behavior . Others explore the physiological and neurobiological processes that underlie cognitive functions and behaviors. Psychologists are involved in research on perception , cognition , attention , emotion , intelligence , subjective experiences , motivation , brain functioning , and personality . Psychologists' interests extend to interpersonal relationships , psychological resilience , family resilience , and other areas within social psychology . They also consider the unconscious mind. [4] Research psychologists employ empirical methods to infer causal and correlational relationships between psychosocial variables . Some, but not all, clinical and counseling psychologists rely on symbolic interpretation . While psychological knowledge is often applied to the assessment and treatment of mental health problems, it is also directed towards understanding and solving problems in several spheres of human activity. By many accounts, psychology ultimately aims to benefit society. [5] [6] [7] Many psychologists are involved in some kind of therapeutic role, practicing psychotherapy in clinical, counseling, or school settings. Other psychologists conduct scientific research on a wide range of topics related to mental processes and behavior. Typically the latter group of psychologists work in academic settings (e.g., universities, medical schools, or hospitals). Another group of psychologists is employed in industrial and organizational settings. [8] Yet others are involved in work on human development , aging, sports , health, forensic science , education , and the media . Etymology and definitions The word psychology derives from the Greek word psyche , for spirit or soul . The latter part of the word psychology derives from -λογία -logia , which means "study" or "research". [9] The word psychology was first used in the Renaissance. [10] In its Latin form psychiologia, it was first employed by the Croatian humanist and Latinist Marko Marulić in his book Psichiologia de ratione animae humanae (Psychology, on the Nature of the Human Soul) in the decade 1510-1520 [10] [11] The earliest known reference to the word psychology in English was by Steven Blankaart in 1694 in The Physical Dictionary. The dictionary refers to " Anatomy , which treats the Body, and Psychology, which treats of the Soul." [12] Ψ (psi) , the first letter of the Greek word psyche from which the term psychology is derived, is commonly associated with the field of psychology. In 1890, William James defined psychology as "the science of mental life, both of its phenomena and their conditions." [13] This definition enjoyed widespread currency for decades. However, this meaning was contested, notably by radical behaviorists such as John B. Watson , who in 1913 asserted that the discipline is a natural science , the theoretical goal of which "is the prediction and control of behavior." [14] Since James defined "psychology", the term more strongly implicates scientific experimentation. [15] [14] Folk psychology is the understanding of the mental states and behaviors of people held by ordinary people , as contrasted with psychology professionals' understanding. [16] History For a chronological guide, see Timeline of psychology . The ancient civilizations of Egypt, Greece, China, India, and Persia all engaged in the philosophical study of psychology. In Ancient Egypt the Ebers Papyrus mentioned depression and thought disorders. [17] Historians note that Greek philosophers, including Thales , Plato , and Aristotle (especially in his De Anima treatise), [18] addressed the workings of the mind. [19] As early as the 4th century BC, the Greek physician Hippocrates theorized that mental disorders had physical rather than supernatural causes. [20] In 387 BCE, Plato suggested that the brain is where mental processes take place, and in 335 BCE Aristotle suggested that it was the heart. [21] In China, psychological understanding grew from the philosophical works of Laozi and Confucius , and later from the doctrines of Buddhism . [22] This body of knowledge involves insights drawn from introspection and observation, as well as techniques for focused thinking and acting. It frames the universe in term of a division of physical reality and mental reality as well as the interaction between the physical and the mental.[ citation needed ] Chinese philosophy also emphasized purifying the mind in order to increase virtue and power. An ancient text known as The Yellow Emperor's Classic of Internal Medicine identifies the brain as the nexus of wisdom and sensation, includes theories of personality based on yin–yang balance, and analyzes mental disorder in terms of physiological and social disequilibria. Chinese scholarship that focused on the brain advanced during the Qing dynasty with the work of Western-educated Fang Yizhi (1611–1671), Liu Zhi (1660–1730), and Wang Qingren (1768–1831). Wang Qingren emphasized the importance of the brain as the center of the nervous system, linked mental disorder with brain diseases, investigated the causes of dreams and insomnia , and advanced a theory of hemispheric lateralization in brain function. [23] Influenced by Hinduism , Indian philosophy explored distinctions in types of awareness. A central idea of the Upanishads and other Vedic texts that formed the foundations of Hinduism was the distinction between a person's transient mundane self and their eternal, unchanging soul . Divergent Hindu doctrines and Buddhism have challenged this hierarchy of selves, but have all emphasized the importance of reaching higher awareness. Yoga encompasses a range of techniques used in pursuit of this goal. Theosophy , a religion established by Russian-American philosopher Helena Blavatsky , drew inspiration from these doctrines during her time in British India . [24] [25] Psychology was of interest to Enlightenment thinkers in Europe. In Germany, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) applied his principles of calculus to the mind, arguing that mental activity took place on an indivisible continuum. He suggested that the difference between conscious and unconscious awareness is only a matter of degree. Christian Wolff identified psychology as its own science, writing Psychologia Empirica in 1732 and Psychologia Rationalis in 1734. Immanuel Kant advanced the idea of anthropology as a discipline, with psychology an important subdivision. Kant, however, explicitly rejected the idea of an experimental psychology , writing that "the empirical doctrine of the soul can also never approach chemistry even as a systematic art of analysis or experimental doctrine, for in it the manifold of inner observation can be separated only by mere division in thought, and cannot then be held separate and recombined at will (but still less does another thinking subject suffer himself to be experimented upon to suit our purpose), and even observation by itself already changes and displaces the state of the observed object." In 1783, Ferdinand Ueberwasser (1752–1812) designated himself Professor of Empirical Psychology and Logic and gave lectures on scientific psychology, though these developments were soon overshadowed by the Napoleonic Wars . [26] At the end of the Napoleonic era, Prussian authorities discontinued the Old University of Münster. [26] Having consulted philosophers Hegel and Herbart , however, in 1825 the Prussian state established psychology as a mandatory discipline in its rapidly expanding and highly influential educational system . However, this discipline did not yet embrace experimentation. [27] In England, early psychology involved phrenology and the response to social problems including alcoholism, violence, and the country's crowded "lunatic" asylums. [28] Beginning of experimental psychology James McKeen Cattell , the first psychologist in the United States Wilhelm Wundt (seated), a German psychologist, with colleagues in his psychological laboratory, the first of its kind, c. 1880 One of the dogs used in Russian psychologist Ivan Pavlov 's experiment with a surgically implanted cannula to measure saliva , preserved in the Pavlov Museum in Ryazan , Russia Philosopher John Stuart Mill believed that the human mind was open to scientific investigation, even if the science is in some ways inexact. [29] Mill proposed a "mental chemistry " in which elementary thoughts could combine into ideas of greater complexity. [29] Gustav Fechner began conducting psychophysics research in Leipzig in the 1830s. He articulated the principle that human perception of a stimulus varies logarithmically according to its intensity. [30] : 61 The principle became known as the Weber–Fechner law . Fechner's 1860 Elements of Psychophysics challenged Kant's negative view with regard to conducting quantitative research on the mind. [31] [27] Fechner's achievement was to show that "mental processes could not only be given numerical magnitudes, but also that these could be measured by experimental methods." [27] In Heidelberg, Hermann von Helmholtz conducted parallel research on sensory perception, and trained physiologist Wilhelm Wundt . Wundt, in turn, came to Leipzig University, where he established the psychological laboratory that brought experimental psychology to the world. Wundt focused on breaking down mental processes into the most basic components, motivated in part by an analogy to recent advances in chemistry, and its successful investigation of the elements and structure of materials. [32] Paul Flechsig and Emil Kraepelin soon created another influential laboratory at Leipzig, a psychology-related lab, that focused more on experimental psychiatry. [27] James McKeen Cattell , a professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania and Columbia University and the co-founder of Psychological Review , was the first professor of psychology in the United States . The German psychologist Hermann Ebbinghaus , a researcher at the University of Berlin , was a 19th-century contributor to the field. He pioneered the experimental study of memory and developed quantitative models of learning and forgetting. [33] In the early 20th century, Wolfgang Kohler , Max Wertheimer , and Kurt Koffka co-founded the school of Gestalt psychology of Fritz Perls . The approach of Gestalt psychology is based upon the idea that individuals experience things as unified wholes. Rather than reducing thoughts and behavior into smaller component elements, as in structuralism, the Gestaltists maintained that whole of experience is important, and differs from the sum of its parts. Psychologists in Germany, Denmark, Austria, England, and the United States soon followed Wundt in setting up laboratories. [34] G. Stanley Hall , an American who studied with Wundt, founded a psychology lab that became internationally influential. The lab was located at Johns Hopkins University . Hall, in turn, trained Yujiro Motora , who brought experimental psychology, emphasizing psychophysics, to the Imperial University of Tokyo . [35] Wundt's assistant, Hugo Münsterberg , taught psychology at Harvard to students such as Narendra Nath Sen Gupta —who, in 1905, founded a psychology department and laboratory at the University of Calcutta . [24] Wundt's students Walter Dill Scott , Lightner Witmer , and James McKeen Cattell worked on developing tests of mental ability. Cattell, who also studied with eugenicist Francis Galton , went on to found the Psychological Corporation . Witmer focused on the mental testing of children; Scott, on employee selection. [30] : 60 Another student of Wundt, the Englishman Edward Titchener , created the psychology program at Cornell University and advanced " structuralist " psychology. The idea behind structuralism was to analyze and classify different aspects of the mind, primarily through the method of introspection . [36] William James, John Dewey , and Harvey Carr advanced the idea of functionalism , an expansive approach to psychology that underlined the Darwinian idea of a behavior's usefulness to the individual. In 1890, James wrote an influential book, The Principles of Psychology , which expanded on the structuralism. He memorably described " stream of consciousness ." James's ideas interested many American students in the emerging discipline. [36] [13] [30] : 178–82 Dewey integrated psychology with societal concerns, most notably by promoting progressive education , inculcating moral values in children, and assimilating immigrants. [30] : 196–200 A different strain of experimentalism, with a greater connection to physiology, emerged in South America, under the leadership of Horacio G. Piñero at the University of Buenos Aires . [37] In Russia, too, researchers placed greater emphasis on the biological basis for psychology, beginning with Ivan Sechenov 's 1873 essay, "Who Is to Develop Psychology and How?" Sechenov advanced the idea of brain reflexes and aggressively promoted a deterministic view of human behavior. [38] The Russian-Soviet physiologist Ivan Pavlov discovered in dogs a learning process that was later termed " classical conditioning " and applied the process to human beings. [39] Consolidation and funding One of the earliest psychology societies was La Société de Psychologie Physiologique in France, which lasted from 1885 to 1893. The first meeting of the International Congress of Psychology sponsored by the International Union of Psychological Science took place in Paris, in August 1889, amidst the World's Fair celebrating the centennial of the French Revolution. William James was one of three Americans among the 400 attendees. The American Psychological Association (APA) was founded soon after, in 1892. The International Congress continued to be held at different locations in Europe and with wide international participation. The Sixth Congress, held in Geneva in 1909, included presentations in Russian, Chinese, and Japanese, as well as Esperanto . After a hiatus for World War I, the Seventh Congress met in Oxford, with substantially greater participation from the war-victorious Anglo-Americans. In 1929, the Congress took place at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut, attended by hundreds of members of the APA. [34] Tokyo Imperial University led the way in bringing new psychology to the East. New ideas about psychology diffused from Japan into China. [23] [35] American psychology gained status upon the U.S.'s entry into World War I. A standing committee headed by Robert Yerkes administered mental tests (" Army Alpha " and " Army Beta ") to almost 1.8 million soldiers. [40] Subsequently, the Rockefeller family , via the Social Science Research Council , began to provide funding for behavioral research. [41] [42] Rockefeller charities funded the National Committee on Mental Hygiene, which disseminated the concept of mental illness and lobbied for applying ideas from psychology to child rearing. [40] [43] Through the Bureau of Social Hygiene and later funding of Alfred Kinsey , Rockefeller foundations helped establish research on sexuality in the U.S. [44] Under the influence of the Carnegie-funded Eugenics Record Office , the Draper-funded Pioneer Fund , and other institutions, the eugenics movement also influenced American psychology. In the 1910s and 1920s, eugenics became a standard topic in psychology classes. [45] In contrast to the US, in the UK psychology was met with antagonism by the scientific and medical establishments, and up until 1939, there were only six psychology chairs in universities in England. [46] During World War II and the Cold War, the U.S. military and intelligence agencies established themselves as leading funders of psychology by way of the armed forces and in the new Office of Strategic Services intelligence agency. University of Michigan psychologist Dorwin Cartwright reported that university researchers began large-scale propaganda research in 1939–1941. He observed that "the last few months of the war saw a social psychologist become chiefly responsible for determining the week-by-week-propaganda policy for the United States Government." Cartwright also wrote that psychologists had significant roles in managing the domestic economy. [47] The Army rolled out its new General Classification Test to assess the ability of millions of soldiers. The Army also engaged in large-scale psychological research of troop morale and mental health . [48] In the 1950s, the Rockefeller Foundation and Ford Foundation collaborated with the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to fund research on psychological warfare . [49] In 1965, public controversy called attention to the Army's Project Camelot , the "Manhattan Project" of social science , an effort which enlisted psychologists and anthropologists to analyze the plans and policies of foreign countries for strategic purposes. [50] [51] In Germany after World War I, psychology held institutional power through the military, which was subsequently expanded along with the rest of the military during Nazi Germany . [27] Under the direction of Hermann Göring 's cousin Matthias Göring , the Berlin Psychoanalytic Institute was renamed the Göring Institute. Freudian psychoanalysts were expelled and persecuted under the anti-Jewish policies of the Nazi Party , and all psychologists had to distance themselves from Freud and Adler , founders of psychoanalysis who were also Jewish. [52] The Göring Institute was well-financed throughout the war with a mandate to create a "New German Psychotherapy." This psychotherapy aimed to align suitable Germans with the overall goals of the Reich. As described by one physician, "Despite the importance of analysis, spiritual guidance and the active cooperation of the patient represent the best way to overcome individual mental problems and to subordinate them to the requirements of the Volk and the Gemeinschaft ." Psychologists were to provide Seelenführung [lit., soul guidance], the leadership of the mind, to integrate people into the new vision of a German community. [53] Harald Schultz-Hencke melded psychology with the Nazi theory of biology and racial origins, criticizing psychoanalysis as a study of the weak and deformed. [54] Johannes Heinrich Schultz , a German psychologist recognized for developing the technique of autogenic training , prominently advocated sterilization and euthanasia of men considered genetically undesirable, and devised techniques for facilitating this process. [55] After the war, new institutions were created although some psychologists, because of their Nazi affiliation, were discredited. Alexander Mitscherlich founded a prominent applied psychoanalysis journal called Psyche. With funding from the Rockefeller Foundation, Mitscherlich established the first clinical psychosomatic medicine division at Heidelberg University. In 1970, psychology was integrated into the required studies of medical students. [56] After the Russian Revolution , the Bolsheviks promoted psychology as a way to engineer the "New Man" of socialism. Consequently, university psychology departments trained large numbers of students in psychology. At the completion of training, positions were made available for those students at schools, workplaces, cultural institutions, and in the military. The Russian state emphasized pedology and the study of child development. Lev Vygotsky became prominent in the field of child development. [38] The Bolsheviks also promoted free love and embraced the doctrine of psychoanalysis as an antidote to sexual repression. [57] : 84–6 [58] Although pedology and intelligence testing fell out of favor in 1936, psychology maintained its privileged position as an instrument of the Soviet Union. [38] Stalinist purges took a heavy toll and instilled a climate of fear in the profession, as elsewhere in Soviet society. [57] : 22 Following World War II, Jewish psychologists past and present, including Lev Vygotsky , A.R. Luria , and Aron Zalkind, were denounced; Ivan Pavlov (posthumously) and Stalin himself were celebrated as heroes of Soviet psychology. [57] : 25–6, 48–9 Soviet academics experienced a degree of liberalization during the Khrushchev Thaw . The topics of cybernetics, linguistics, and genetics became acceptable again. The new field of engineering psychology emerged. The field involved the study of the mental aspects of complex jobs (such as pilot and cosmonaut). Interdisciplinary studies became popular and scholars such as Georgy Shchedrovitsky developed systems theory approaches to human behavior. [57] : 27–33 Twentieth-century Chinese psychology originally modeled itself on U.S. psychology, with translations from American authors like William James, the establishment of university psychology departments and journals, and the establishment of groups including the Chinese Association of Psychological Testing (1930) and the Chinese Psychological Society (1937). Chinese psychologists were encouraged to focus on education and language learning. Chinese psychologists were drawn to the idea that education would enable modernization. John Dewey, who lectured to Chinese audiences between 1919 and 1921, had a significant influence on psychology in China. Chancellor T'sai Yuan-p'ei introduced him at Peking University as a greater thinker than Confucius. Kuo Zing-yang who received a PhD at the University of California, Berkeley, became President of Zhejiang University and popularized behaviorism . [59] : 5–9 After the Chinese Communist Party gained control of the country, the Stalinist Soviet Union became the major influence, with Marxism–Leninism the leading social doctrine and Pavlovian conditioning the approved means of behavior change. Chinese psychologists elaborated on Lenin's model of a "reflective" consciousness, envisioning an "active consciousness" ( pinyin : tzu-chueh neng-tung-li) able to transcend material conditions through hard work and ideological struggle. They developed a concept of "recognition" ( pinyin : jen-shih) which referred to the interface between individual perceptions and the socially accepted worldview; failure to correspond with party doctrine was "incorrect recognition." [59] : 9–17 Psychology education was centralized under the Chinese Academy of Sciences , supervised by the State Council . In 1951, the academy created a Psychology Research Office, which in 1956 became the Institute of Psychology. Because most leading psychologists were educated in the United States, the first concern of the academy was the re-education of these psychologists in the Soviet doctrines. Child psychology and pedagogy for the purpose of a nationally cohesive education remained a central goal of the discipline. [59] : 18–24 Women in psychology 1900 - 1949 Women in the early 1900s started to make key findings within the world of psychology. In 1923, Anna Freud , [60] the daughter of Sigmund Freud , built on her father's work using different defense mechanisms (denial, repression, and suppression) to psychoanalyze children. She believed that once a child reached the latency period , child analysis could be used as a mode of therapy .  She stated it is important focus on the child's environment, support their development, and prevent neurosis . She believed a child should be recognized as their own person with their own right and have each session catered to the child’s specific needs. She encouraged drawing, moving freely, and expressing themselves in any way. This helped build a strong therapeutic alliance with child patients, which allows psychologists to observe their normal behavior. She continued her research on the impact of children after family separation, children with socio-economically disadvantaged backgrounds, and all stages of child development from infancy to adolescence. Functional periodicity , the belief women are mentally and physically impaired during menstruation , impacted women’s rights because employers were less likely to hire them due to the belief they would be incapable of working for 1 week a month. Leta Stetter Hollingworth wanted to prove this hypothesis and Edward L. Thorndike's theory, that women have lesser psychological and physical traits than men and were simply mediocre, incorrect. Hollingworth worked to prove differences were not from male genetic superiority, but from culture. She also included the concept of women’s impairment during menstruation in her research. She recorded both women and men performances on tasks (cognitive, perceptual, and motor) for three months. No evidence was found of decreased performance due to a woman's menstrual cycle. [61] She also challenged the belief intelligence is inherited and women here are intellectually inferior to men. She stated that women do not reach positions of power due to the societal norms and roles they are assigned. As she states in her article, "Variability as related to sex differences in achievement: A Critique", [62] the largest problem women have is the social order that was built due to the assumption women have less interests and abilities than men. To further prove her point, she completed another experiment with infants who have not been influenced by the environment of social norms, like the adult male getting more opportunities than women. She found no difference between infants besides size. After this research proved the original hypothesis wrong, Hollingworth was able to show there is no difference between the physiological and psychological traits of men and women, and women are not impaired during menstruation . [63] The first half of the 1900s was filled with new theories and it was a turning point for women's recognition within the field of psychology. In addition to the contributions made by Leta Stetter Hollingworth and Anna Freud , Mary Whiton Calkins invented the paired associates technique of studying memory and developed self-psychology . [64] Karen Horney developed the concept of " womb envy " and neurotic needs. [65] Psychoanalyst Melanie Klein impacted developmental psychology with her research of play therapy . [66] These great discoveries and contributions were made during struggles of sexism , discrimination , and little recognition for their work. 1950-1999 Women in the second half of the 20th century continued to do research that had large-scale impacts on the field of psychology. Mary Ainsworth 's work centered around attachment theory . Building off fellow psychologist John Bowlby , Ainsworth spent years doing fieldwork to understand the development of mother-infant relationships. In doing this field research, Ainsworth developed the Strange Situation Procedure, a laboratory procedure meant to study attachment style by separating and uniting a child with their mother several different times under different circumstances. These field studies are also where she developed her attachment theory and the order of attachment styles , which was a landmark for developmental psychology . [67] [68] Because of her work, Ainsworth became one of the most cited psychologists of all time. [69] Mamie Phipps Clark was another woman in psychology that changed the field with her research. She was one of the first African-Americans to receive a doctoral degree in psychology from Columbia University , along with her husband, Kenneth Clark . Her master’s thesis, “The Development of Consciousness in Negro Pre-School Children,” argued that black children’s self-esteem was negatively impacted by racial discrimination . She and her husband conduced research building off her thesis throughout the 1940’s. These tests, called the doll tests , asked young children to choose between identical dolls whose only difference was race, and they found that the majority of the children preferred the white dolls and attributed positive traits to them. Repeated over and over again, these tests helped to determine the negative effects of racial discrimination and segregation on black children’s self-image and development. In 1954, this research would help decide the landmark Brown v. Board of Education decision, leading to the end of legal segregation across the nation. Clark went on to be an influential figure in psychology, her work continuing to focus on minority youth. [70] As the field of psychology developed throughout the latter half of the 20th century, women in the field advocated for their voices to be heard and their perspectives to be valued. Second-wave feminism did not miss psychology. An outspoken feminist in psychology was Naomi Weisstein , who was an accomplished researcher in psychology and neuroscience , and is perhaps best known for her paper, “Kirche, Kuche, Kinder as Scientific Law: Psychology Constructs the Female.” Psychology Constructs the Female criticized the field of psychology for centering men and using biology too much to explain gender differences without taking into account social factors. [71] Her work set the stage for further research to be done in social psychology , especially in gender construction . [72] Other women in the field also continued advocating for women in psychology, creating the Association for Women in Psychology to criticize how the field treated women. E. Kitsch Child , Phyllis Chesler , and Dorothy Riddle were some of the founding members of the organization in 1969. [73] [74] The latter half of the 20th century further diversified the field of psychology, with women of color reaching new milestones. In 1962, Martha Bernal became the first Latina woman to get a Ph.D in psychology. In 1969, Marigold Linton , the first Native American woman to get a Ph.D. in psychology, founded the National Indian Education Association . She was also a founding member of the Society for Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science . In 1971, The Network of Indian Psychologists was established by Carolyn Attneave . Harriet McAdoo was appointed to the White House Conference on Families in 1979. [75] 2000 - Current Babette Rothschild, a clinical social worker, invented Somatic Trauma Therapy. Somatic Trauma Therapy utilizes the body to experience, process, and heal from traumatic experiences. To spread her technique she wrote several books, the most prominent being The Body Remembers: The Psychophysiology of Trauma, Trauma, and Trauma Treatment [76] , which was published in 2000. [77] Dr. Tara Brach has written several bestselling books that combine Western and Eastern psychology. She founded the Insight Meditation Community of Washington in 1998 and co-founded two teaching programs, Banyan, and the Mindfulness Mediation Teacher Training Program. The latter has served people from 74 different countries. [78] Dr. Kay Redfield Jamison , named one of Time Magazine's “Best Doctors in the United States” is a lecturer, psychologist, and writer. She is known for her vast modern contributions to bipolar disorder and her books An Unquiet Mind [79] (Published 1995) and Nothing Was the Same [80] (Published in 2009). Having Bipolar Disorder herself, she has written several memoirs about her experience with suicidal thoughts , manic behaviors, depression , and other issues that arise from being Bipolar . [81] Dr. Angela Neal-Barnett views psychology through a Black lens and dedicated her career to focusing on the anxiety of African American women. She founded the organization Rise Sally Rise which helps Black women cope with anxiety. She published her work Soothe Your Nerves: The Black Woman’s Guide to Understanding and Overcoming Anxiety, Panic and Fear [82] in 2003. [83] In 2003 Kristin Neff founded the Self Compassion Scale, a tool for therapists to use to measure their compassion for themselves. In addition to this, she has written several books the most relevant being Self Compassion: The Proven Power to Being Kind to Yourself [84] (Published in 2011) and Fierce Self-Compassion: How Women Can Harness Kindness to Speak Up, Claim Their Power and Thrive [85] (Published in 2021). [86] In 2002 Dr. Teresa LaFromboise, former president of the Society of Indian Psychologists, received the APA’s Distinguished Career Contribution to Research Award from the Society for the Psychological Study of Culture Ethnicity, and Race for her research on suicide prevention . She was the first person to lead an intervention for Native American children and adolescents that utilized evidence-based suicide prevention. She has spent her career dedicated to aiding racial and ethnic minority youth cope with cultural adjustment and pressures. [87] Dr. Shari Miles-Cohen, a psychologist and political activist has applied a black, feminist, and class lens to all her psychological studies. Aiding progressive and women's issues, she has been the executive director for many NGOs. In 2007 she became the Senior Director of the Women's Programs Office of the American Psychological Association. Therefore, she was one of the creators of the APA’s “Women in Psychology Timeline” which features the accomplishments of women of color in psychology. She is well known for co-editing Eliminating Inequities for Women with Disabilities: An Agenda for Health and Wellness [88] (published in 2016), her article published in the Women's Reproductive Health Journal about women of color’s struggle with pregnancy and postpartum (Published in 2018), and co-authoring the award-winning “APA Handbook of the Psychology of Women" (published in 2019). [89] Disciplinary organizations See also: List of psychology organizations In 1920, Édouard Claparède and Pierre Bovet created a new applied psychology organization called the International Congress of Psychotechnics Applied to Vocational Guidance, later called the International Congress of Psychotechnics and then the International Association of Applied Psychology . [34] The IAAP is considered the oldest international psychology association. [90] Today, at least 65 international groups deal with specialized aspects of psychology. [90] In response to male predominance in the field, female psychologists in the U.S. formed the National Council of Women Psychologists in 1941. This organization became the International Council of Women Psychologists after World War II and the International Council of Psychologists in 1959. Several associations including the Association of Black Psychologists and the Asian American Psychological Association have arisen to promote the inclusion of non-European racial groups in the profession. [90] The International Union of Psychological Science (IUPsyS) is the world federation of national psychological societies. The IUPsyS was founded in 1951 under the auspices of the United Nations Educational, Cultural and Scientific Organization (UNESCO) . [34] [91] Psychology departments have since proliferated around the world, based primarily on the Euro-American model. [24] [91] Since 1966, the Union has published the International Journal of Psychology. [34] IAAP and IUPsyS agreed in 1976 each to hold a congress every four years, on a staggered basis. [90] IUPsyS recognizes 66 national psychology associations and at least 15 others exist. [90] The American Psychological Association is the oldest and largest. [90] Its membership has increased from 5,000 in 1945 to 100,000 in the present day. [36] The APA includes 54 divisions , which since 1960 have steadily proliferated to include more specialties. Some of these divisions, such as the Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues and the American Psychology–Law Society , began as autonomous groups. [90] The Interamerican Psychological Society , founded in 1951, aspires to promote psychology across the Western Hemisphere. It holds the Interamerican Congress of Psychology and had 1,000 members in year 2000. The European Federation of Professional Psychology Associations, founded in 1981, represents 30 national associations with a total of 100,000 individual members. At least 30 other international organizations represent psychologists in different regions. [90] In some places, governments legally regulate who can provide psychological services or represent themselves as a "psychologist." [92] The APA defines a psychologist as someone with a doctoral degree in psychology. [93] Boundaries Early practitioners of experimental psychology distinguished themselves from parapsychology , which in the late nineteenth century enjoyed popularity (including the interest of scholars such as William James). Some people considered parapsychology to be part of "psychology." Parapsychology, hypnotism , and psychism were major topics at the early International Congresses. But students of these fields were eventually ostracized, and more or less banished from the Congress in 1900–1905. [34] Parapsychology persisted for a time at Imperial University in Japan, with publications such as Clairvoyance and Thoughtography by Tomokichi Fukurai, but it was mostly shunned by 1913. [35] As a discipline, psychology has long sought to fend off accusations that it is a "soft" science . Philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn 's 1962 critique implied psychology overall was in a pre-paradigm state, lacking agreement on the type of overarching theory found in mature hard sciences such as chemistry and physics. [94] Because some areas of psychology rely on research methods such as self-reports in surveys and questionnaires, critics asserted that psychology is not an objective science. Skeptics have suggested that personality, thinking, and emotion cannot be directly measured and are often inferred from subjective self-reports, which may be problematic. Experimental psychologists have devised a variety of ways to indirectly measure these elusive phenomenological entities. [95] [96] [97] Divisions still exist within the field, with some psychologists more oriented towards the unique experiences of individual humans, which cannot be understood only as data points within a larger population. Critics inside and outside the field have argued that mainstream psychology has become increasingly dominated by a "cult of empiricism", which limits the scope of research because investigators restrict themselves to methods derived from the physical sciences. [98] : 36–7 Feminist critiques have argued that claims to scientific objectivity obscure the values and agenda of (historically) mostly male researchers. [40] Jean Grimshaw, for example, argues that mainstream psychological research has advanced a patriarchal agenda through its efforts to control behavior. [98] : 120 Major schools of thought Main article: Cognitive neuroscience False-color representations of cerebral fiber pathways affected, per Van Horn et al. [V] : 3 Psychologists generally consider biology the substrate of thought and feeling, and therefore an important area of study. Behaviorial neuroscience, also known as biological psychology, involves the application of biological principles to the study of physiological and genetic mechanisms underlying behavior in humans and other animals. The allied field of comparative psychology is the scientific study of the behavior and mental processes of non-human animals. [99] A leading question in behavioral neuroscience has been whether and how mental functions are localized in the brain . From Phineas Gage to H.M. and Clive Wearing , individual people with mental deficits traceable to physical brain damage have inspired new discoveries in this area. [100] Modern behavioral neuroscience could be said to originate in the 1870s, when in France Paul Broca traced production of speech to the left frontal gyrus, thereby also demonstrating hemispheric lateralization of brain function. Soon after, Carl Wernicke identified a related area necessary for the understanding of speech. [101] : 20–2 The contemporary field of behavioral neuroscience focuses on the physical basis of behavior. Behaviorial neuroscientists use animal models, often relying on rats, to study the neural, genetic, and cellular mechanisms that underlie behaviors involved in learning, memory, and fear responses. [102] Cognitive neuroscientists , by using neural imaging tools, investigate the neural correlates of psychological processes in humans. Neuropsychologists conduct psychological assessments to determine how an individual's behavior and cognition are related to the brain. The biopsychosocial model is a cross-disciplinary, holistic model that concerns the ways in which interrelationships of biological, psychological, and socio-environmental factors affect health and behavior. [103] Evolutionary psychology approaches thought and behavior from a modern evolutionary perspective. This perspective suggests that psychological adaptations evolved to solve recurrent problems in human ancestral environments. Evolutionary psychologists attempt to find out how human psychological traits are evolved adaptations, the results of natural selection or sexual selection over the course of human evolution. [104] The history of the biological foundations of psychology includes evidence of racism. The idea of white supremacy and indeed the modern concept of race itself arose during the process of world conquest by Europeans. [105] Carl von Linnaeus 's four-fold classification of humans classifies Europeans as intelligent and severe, Americans as contented and free, Asians as ritualistic, and Africans as lazy and capricious. Race was also used to justify the construction of socially specific mental disorders such as drapetomania and dysaesthesia aethiopica —the behavior of uncooperative African slaves. [106] After the creation of experimental psychology, "ethnical psychology" emerged as a subdiscipline, based on the assumption that studying primitive races would provide an important link between animal behavior and the psychology of more evolved humans. [107] Behaviorist Skinner's teaching machine , a mechanical invention to automate the task of programmed instruction The film of the Little Albert experiment A tenet of behavioral research is that a large part of both human and lower-animal behavior is learned. A principle associated with behavioral research is that the mechanisms involved in learning apply to humans and non-human animals. Behavioral researchers have developed a treatment known as behavior modification , which is used to help individuals replace undesirable behaviors with desirable ones. Early behavioral researchers studied stimulus–response pairings, now known as classical conditioning . They demonstrated that when a biologically potent stimulus (e.g., food that elicits salivation) is paired with a previously neutral stimulus (e.g., a bell) over several learning trials, the neutral stimulus by itself can come to elicit the response the biologically potent stimulus elicits. Ivan Pavlov —known best for inducing dogs to salivate in the presence of a stimulus previously linked with food—became a leading figure in the Soviet Union and inspired followers to use his methods on humans. [38] In the United States, Edward Lee Thorndike initiated " connectionist " studies by trapping animals in "puzzle boxes" and rewarding them for escaping. Thorndike wrote in 1911, "There can be no moral warrant for studying man's nature unless the study will enable us to control his acts." [30] : 212–5 From 1910 to 1913 the American Psychological Association went through a sea change of opinion, away from mentalism and towards "behavioralism." In 1913, John B. Watson coined the term behaviorism for this school of thought. [30] : 218–27 Watson's famous Little Albert experiment in 1920 was at first thought to demonstrate that repeated use of upsetting loud noises could instill phobias (aversions to other stimuli) in an infant human, [14] [108] although such a conclusion was likely an exaggeration. [109] Karl Lashley , a close collaborator with Watson, examined biological manifestations of learning in the brain. [100] Clark L. Hull , Edwin Guthrie , and others did much to help behaviorism become a widely used paradigm. [36] A new method of "instrumental" or " operant " conditioning added the concepts of reinforcement and punishment to the model of behavior change. Radical behaviorists avoided discussing the inner workings of the mind, especially the unconscious mind, which they considered impossible to assess scientifically. [110] Operant conditioning was first described by Miller and Kanorski and popularized in the U.S. by B.F. Skinner , who emerged as a leading intellectual of the behaviorist movement. [111] [112] Noam Chomsky published an influential critique of radical behaviorism on the grounds that behaviorist principles could not adequately explain the complex mental process of language acquisition and language use. [113] [114] The review, which was scathing, did much to reduce the status of behaviorism within psychology. [30] : 282–5 Martin Seligman and his colleagues discovered that they could condition in dogs a state of " learned helplessness ", which was not predicted by the behaviorist approach to psychology. [115] [116] Edward C. Tolman advanced a hybrid "cognitive behavioral" model, most notably with his 1948 publication discussing the cognitive maps used by rats to guess at the location of food at the end of a maze. [117] Skinner's behaviorism did not die, in part because it generated successful practical applications. [114] The Association for Behavior Analysis International was founded in 1974 and by 2003 had members from 42 countries. The field has gained a foothold in Latin America and Japan. [118] Applied behavior analysis is the term used for the application of the principles of operant conditioning to change socially significant behavior (it supersedes the term, "behavior modification"). [119] Cognitive The Müller–Lyer illusion . Psychologists make inferences about mental processes from shared phenomena such as optical illusions. Green Red BluePurple Blue Purple Blue Purple RedGreen Purple Green The Stroop effect is the fact that naming the color of the first set of words is easier and quicker than the second. Cognitive psychology involves the study of mental processes , including perception , attention , language comprehension and production, memory , and problem solving. [120] Researchers in the field of cognitive psychology are sometimes called cognitivists . They rely on an information processing model of mental functioning. Cognitivist research is informed by functionalism and experimental psychology. Starting in the 1950s, the experimental techniques developed by Wundt, James, Ebbinghaus, and others re-emerged as experimental psychology became increasingly cognitivist and, eventually, constituted a part of the wider, interdisciplinary cognitive science . [121] [122] Some called this development the cognitive revolution because it rejected the anti-mentalist dogma of behaviorism as well as the strictures of psychoanalysis. [122] Albert Bandura helped along the transition in psychology from behaviorism to cognitive psychology. Bandura and other social learning theorists advanced the idea of vicarious learning. In other words, they advanced the view that a child can learn by observing the immediate social environment and not necessarily from having been reinforced for enacting a behavior, although they did not rule out the influence of reinforcement on learning a behavior. [123] Technological advances also renewed interest in mental states and mental representations. English neuroscientist Charles Sherrington and Canadian psychologist Donald O. Hebb used experimental methods to link psychological phenomena to the structure and function of the brain. The rise of computer science, cybernetics , and artificial intelligence underlined the value of comparing information processing in humans and machines. A popular and representative topic in this area is cognitive bias , or irrational thought. Psychologists (and economists) have classified and described a sizeable catalog of biases which recur frequently in human thought. The availability heuristic , for example, is the tendency to overestimate the importance of something which happens to come readily to mind. [124] Elements of behaviorism and cognitive psychology were synthesized to form cognitive behavioral therapy , a form of psychotherapy modified from techniques developed by American psychologist Albert Ellis and American psychiatrist Aaron T. Beck . On a broader level, cognitive science is an interdisciplinary enterprise involving cognitive psychologists, cognitive neuroscientists, linguists, and researchers in artificial intelligence, human–computer interaction, and computational neuroscience . The discipline of cognitive science covers cognitive psychology as well as philosophy of mind, computer science, and neuroscience. [125] Computer simulations are sometimes used to model phenomena of interest. Social See also: Social psychology (sociology) Social psychology is concerned with how behaviors , thoughts , feelings , and the social environment influence human interactions. [126] Social psychologists study such topics as the influence of others on an individual's behavior (e.g. conformity , persuasion ) and the formation of beliefs, attitudes , and stereotypes about other people. Social cognition fuses elements of social and cognitive psychology for the purpose of understanding how people process, remember, or distort social information. The study of group dynamics involves research on the nature of leadership, organizational communication, and related phenomena. In recent years, social psychologists have become interested in implicit measures, mediational models, and the interaction of person and social factors in accounting for behavior. Some concepts that sociologists have applied to the study of psychiatric disorders, concepts such as the social role, sick role, social class, life events, culture, migration, and total institution , have influenced social psychologists. [127] Psychoanalytic Front row: Sigmund Freud , G. Stanley Hall, Carl Jung ]. Back row: Abraham A. Brill , Ernest Jones , Sándor Ferenczi at Clark University in 1909. Psychoanalysis is a collection of theories and therapeutic techniques intended to analyze the unconscious mind and its impact on everyday life. These theories and techniques inform treatments for mental disorders. [128] [129] [130] Psychoanalysis originated in the 1890s, most prominently with the work of Sigmund Freud . Freud's psychoanalytic theory was largely based on interpretive methods, introspection , and clinical observation. It became very well known, largely because it tackled subjects such as sexuality , repression , and the unconscious. [57] : 84–6 Freud pioneered the methods of free association and dream interpretation . [131] [132] Psychoanalytic theory is not monolithic. Other well-known psychoanalytic thinkers who diverged from Freud include Alfred Adler , Carl Jung , Erik Erikson , Melanie Klein , D.W. Winnicott , Karen Horney , Erich Fromm , John Bowlby , Freud's daughter Anna Freud , and Harry Stack Sullivan . These individuals ensured that psychoanalysis would evolve into diverse schools of thought. Among these schools are ego psychology , object relations , and interpersonal , Lacanian , and relational psychoanalysis . Psychologists such as Hans Eysenck and philosophers including Karl Popper sharply criticized psychoanalysis. Popper argued that psychoanalysis was not falsifiable (no claim it made could be proven wrong) and therefore inherently not a scientific discipline, [133] whereas Eysenck advanced the view that psychoanalytic tenets had been contradicted by experimental data. By the end of the 20th century, psychology departments in American universities mostly had marginalized Freudian theory, dismissing it as a "desiccated and dead" historical artifact. [134] Researchers such as António Damásio , Oliver Sacks , and Joseph LeDoux ; and individuals in the emerging field of neuro-psychoanalysis have defended some of Freud's ideas on scientific grounds. [135] Existential-humanistic Main articles: Existential psychology and Humanistic psychology Psychologist Abraham Maslow in 1943 posited that humans have a hierarchy of needs, and it makes sense to fulfill the basic needs first before higher-order needs can be met. [136] Humanistic psychology , which has been influenced by existentialism and phenomenology, [137] stresses free will and self-actualization . [138] It emerged in the 1950s as a movement within academic psychology, in reaction to both behaviorism and psychoanalysis. [139] The humanistic approach seeks to view the whole person, not just fragmented parts of the personality or isolated cognitions. [140] Humanistic psychology also focuses on personal growth, self-identity , death, aloneness, and freedom. It emphasizes subjective meaning, the rejection of determinism, and concern for positive growth rather than pathology. Some founders of the humanistic school of thought were American psychologists Abraham Maslow , who formulated a hierarchy of human needs , and Carl Rogers , who created and developed client-centered therapy . Later, positive psychology opened up humanistic themes to scientific study. Positive psychology is the study of factors which contribute to human happiness and well-being, focusing more on people who are currently healthy. In 2010, Clinical Psychological Review published a special issue devoted to positive psychological interventions, such as gratitude journaling and the physical expression of gratitude. It is, however, far from clear that positive psychology is effective in making people happier. [141] [142] Positive psychological interventions have been limited in scope, but their effects are thought to be somewhat better than placebo effects. The American Association for Humanistic Psychology, formed in 1963, declared: Humanistic psychology is primarily an orientation toward the whole of psychology rather than a distinct area or school. It stands for respect for the worth of persons, respect for differences of approach, open-mindedness as to acceptable methods, and interest in exploration of new aspects of human behavior. As a "third force" in contemporary psychology, it is concerned with topics having little place in existing theories and systems: e.g., love, creativity, self, growth, organism, basic need-gratification, self-actualization, higher values, being, becoming, spontaneity, play, humor, affection, naturalness, warmth, ego-transcendence, objectivity, autonomy, responsibility, meaning, fair-play, transcendental experience, peak experience, courage, and related concepts. [143] Existential psychology emphasizes the need to understand a client's total orientation towards the world. Existential psychology is opposed to reductionism, behaviorism, and other methods that objectify the individual. [138] In the 1950s and 1960s, influenced by philosophers Søren Kierkegaard and Martin Heidegger , psychoanalytically trained American psychologist Rollo May helped to develop existential psychology. Existential psychotherapy , which follows from existential psychology, is a therapeutic approach that is based on the idea that a person's inner conflict arises from that individual's confrontation with the givens of existence. Swiss psychoanalyst Ludwig Binswanger and American psychologist George Kelly may also be said to belong to the existential school. [144] Existential psychologists tend to differ from more "humanistic" psychologists in the former's relatively neutral view of human nature and relatively positive assessment of anxiety. [145] Existential psychologists emphasized the humanistic themes of death, free will, and meaning, suggesting that meaning can be shaped by myths and narratives; meaning can be deepened by the acceptance of free will, which is requisite to living an authentic life, albeit often with anxiety with regard to death. [146] Austrian existential psychiatrist and Holocaust survivor Viktor Frankl drew evidence of meaning's therapeutic power from reflections upon his own internment . [147] He created a variation of existential psychotherapy called logotherapy , a type of existentialist analysis that focuses on a will to meaning (in one's life), as opposed to Adler's Nietzschean doctrine of will to power or Freud's will to pleasure . [148] Themes Main article: Personality psychology Personality psychology is concerned with enduring patterns of behavior, thought, and emotion. Theories of personality vary across different psychological schools of thought. Each theory carries different assumptions about such features as the role of the unconscious and the importance of childhood experience. According to Freud, personality is based on the dynamic interactions of the id, ego, and super-ego . [149] By contrast, trait theorists have developed taxonomies of personality constructs in describing personality in terms of key traits. Trait theorists have often employed statistical data-reduction methods, such as factor analysis . Although the number of proposed traits has varied widely, Hans Eysenck 's early biologically-based model suggests at least three major trait constructs are necessary to describe human personality, extraversion–introversion , neuroticism -stability, and psychoticism -normality. Raymond Cattell empirically derived a theory of 16 personality factors at the primary-factor level and up to eight broader second-stratum factors. [150] [151] [152] [153] Since the 1980s, the Big Five ( openness to experience , conscientiousness , extraversion , agreeableness , and neuroticism ) emerged as an important trait theory of personality. [154] Dimensional models of personality are receiving increasing support, and a version of dimensional assessment has been included in the DSM-V . However, despite a plethora of research into the various versions of the "Big Five" personality dimensions, it appears necessary to move on from static conceptualizations of personality structure to a more dynamic orientation, acknowledging that personality constructs are subject to learning and change over the lifespan. [155] [156] An early example of personality assessment was the Woodworth Personal Data Sheet , constructed during World War I. The popular, although psychometrically inadequate, Myers–Briggs Type Indicator [157] was developed to assess individuals' "personality types" according to the personality theories of Carl Jung . The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), despite its name, is more a dimensional measure of psychopathology than a personality measure. [158] California Psychological Inventory contains 20 personality scales (e.g., independence, tolerance). [159] The International Personality Item Pool , which is in the public domain, has become a source of scales that can be used personality assessment. [160] Unconscious mind See also: Unconscious mind § Psychology Study of the unconscious mind, a part of the psyche outside the individual's awareness but that is believed to influence conscious thought and behavior, was a hallmark of early psychology. In one of the first psychology experiments conducted in the United States, C.S. Peirce and Joseph Jastrow found in 1884 that research subjects could choose the minutely heavier of two weights even if consciously uncertain of the difference. [161] Freud popularized the concept of the unconscious mind, particularly when he referred to an uncensored intrusion of unconscious thought into one's speech (a Freudian slip ) or to his efforts to interpret dreams . [162] His 1901 book The Psychopathology of Everyday Life catalogs hundreds of everyday events that Freud explains in terms of unconscious influence. Pierre Janet advanced the idea of a subconscious mind, which could contain autonomous mental elements unavailable to the direct scrutiny of the subject. [163] The concept of unconscious processes has remained important in psychology. Cognitive psychologists have used a "filter" model of attention. According to the model, much information processing takes place below the threshold of consciousness, and only certain stimuli, limited by their nature and number, make their way through the filter. Much research has shown that subconscious priming of certain ideas can covertly influence thoughts and behavior. [163] Because of the unreliability of self-reporting, a major hurdle in this type of research involves demonstrating that a subject's conscious mind has not perceived a target stimulus. For this reason, some psychologists prefer to distinguish between implicit and explicit memory. In another approach, one can also describe a subliminal stimulus as meeting an objective but not a subjective threshold. [164] The automaticity model of John Bargh and others involves the ideas of automaticity and unconscious processing in our understanding of social behavior , [165] [166] although there has been dispute with regard to replication. [167] [168] Some experimental data suggest that the brain begins to consider taking actions before the mind becomes aware of them. [169] The influence of unconscious forces on people's choices bears on the philosophical question of free will. John Bargh, Daniel Wegner , and Ellen Langer describe free will as an illusion . [165] [166] [170] Motivation Main article: Motivation Some psychologists study motivation or the subject of why people or lower animals initiate a behavior at a particular time. It also involves the study of why humans and lower animals continue or terminate a behavior. Psychologists such as William James initially used the term motivation to refer to intention, in a sense similar to the concept of will in European philosophy. With the steady rise of Darwinian and Freudian thinking, instinct also came to be seen as a primary source of motivation. [171] According to drive theory , the forces of instinct combine into a single source of energy which exerts a constant influence. Psychoanalysis, like biology, regarded these forces as demands originating in the nervous system. Psychoanalysts believed that these forces, especially the sexual instincts, could become entangled and transmuted within the psyche. Classical psychoanalysis conceives of a struggle between the pleasure principle and the reality principle , roughly corresponding to id and ego. Later, in Beyond the Pleasure Principle , Freud introduced the concept of the death drive , a compulsion towards aggression, destruction, and psychic repetition of traumatic events . [172] Meanwhile, behaviorist researchers used simple dichotomous models (pleasure/pain, reward/punishment) and well-established principles such as the idea that a thirsty creature will take pleasure in drinking. [171] [173] Clark Hull formalized the latter idea with his drive reduction model. [174] Hunger, thirst, fear, sexual desire, and thermoregulation constitute fundamental motivations in animals. [173] Humans seem to exhibit a more complex set of motivations—though theoretically these could be explained as resulting from desires for belonging, positive self-image, self-consistency, truth, love, and control. [175] [176] Motivation can be modulated or manipulated in many different ways. Researchers have found that eating , for example, depends not only on the organism's fundamental need for homeostasis —an important factor causing the experience of hunger—but also on circadian rhythms, food availability, food palatability, and cost. [173] Abstract motivations are also malleable, as evidenced by such phenomena as goal contagion: the adoption of goals, sometimes unconsciously, based on inferences about the goals of others. [177] Vohs and Baumeister suggest that contrary to the need-desire-fulfillment cycle of animal instincts, human motivations sometimes obey a "getting begets wanting" rule: the more you get a reward such as self-esteem, love, drugs, or money, the more you want it. They suggest that this principle can even apply to food, drink, sex, and sleep. [178] Development psychology Main article: Developmental psychology Developmental psychologists engage a child with a book and then make observations based on how the child interacts with the object. Developmental psychology is the scientific study of how and why the thought processes, emotions, and behaviors of humans change over the course of their lives. [179] Some credit Charles Darwin with conducting the first systematic study within the rubric of developmental psychology, having published in 1877 a short paper detailing the development of innate forms of communication based on his observations of his infant son. [180] The main origins of the discipline, however, are found in the work of Jean Piaget . Like Piaget, developmental psychologists originally focused primarily on the development of cognition from infancy to adolescence. Later, developmental psychology extended itself to the study cognition over the life span. In addition to studying cognition, developmental psychologists have also come to focus on affective, behavioral, moral, social, and neural development. Developmental psychologists who study children use a number of research methods. For example, they make observations of children in natural settings such as preschools [181] and engage them in experimental tasks. [182] Such tasks often resemble specially designed games and activities that are both enjoyable for the child and scientifically useful. Developmental researchers have even devised clever methods to study the mental processes of infants. [183] In addition to studying children, developmental psychologists also study aging and processes throughout the life span, including old age. [184] These psychologists draw on the full range of psychological theories to inform their research. [179] Genes and environment Main article: Behavioural genetics All researched psychological traits are influenced by both genes and environment , to varying degrees. [185] [186] These two sources of influence are often confounded in observational research of individuals and families. An example of this confounding can be shown in the transmission of depression from a depressed mother to her offspring. A theory based on environmental transmission would hold that an offspring, by virtue of their having a problematic rearing environment managed by a depressed mother, is at risk for developing depression. On the other hand, a hereditarian theory would hold that depression risk in an offspring is influenced to some extent by genes passed to the child from the mother. Genes and environment in these simple transmission models are completely confounded. A depressed mother may both carry genes that contribute to depression in her offspring and also create a rearing environment that increases the risk of depression in her child. [187] Behavioral genetics researchers have employed methodologies that help to disentangle this confound and understand the nature and origins of individual differences in behavior. [104] Traditionally the research has involved twin studies and adoption studies , two designs where genetic and environmental influences can be partially un-confounded. More recently, gene-focused research has contributed to understanding genetic contributions to the development of psychological traits. The availability of microarray molecular genetic or genome sequencing technologies allows researchers to measure participant DNA variation directly, and test whether individual genetic variants within genes are associated with psychological traits and psychopathology through methods including genome-wide association studies . One goal of such research is similar to that in positional cloning and its success in Huntington's : once a causal gene is discovered biological research can be conducted to understand how that gene influences the phenotype. One major result of genetic association studies is the general finding that psychological traits and psychopathology, as well as complex medical diseases, are highly polygenic , [188] [189] [190] [191] [192] where a large number (on the order of hundreds to thousands) of genetic variants, each of small effect, contribute to individual differences in the behavioral trait or propensity to the disorder. Active research continues to work toward understanding the genetic and environmental bases of behavior and their interaction. Applications Psychology encompasses many subfields and includes different approaches to the study of mental processes and behavior. Psychological testing See also: Psychometrics and social statistics Francis Galton , a pioneer of the experimental psychology field Psychological testing has ancient origins, dating as far back as 2200 BC, in the examinations for the Chinese civil service . Written exams began during the Han dynasty (202 BC – AD 200). By 1370, the Chinese system required a stratified series of tests, involving essay writing and knowledge of diverse topics. The system was ended in 1906. [193] : 41–2 In Europe, mental assessment took a different approach, with theories of physiognomy —judgment of character based on the face—described by Aristotle in 4th century BC Greece. Physiognomy remained current through the Enlightenment, and added the doctrine of phrenology: a study of mind and intelligence based on simple assessment of neuroanatomy. [193] : 42–3 When experimental psychology came to Britain, Francis Galton was a leading practitioner. By virtue of his procedures for measuring reaction time and sensation, he is considered an inventor of modern mental testing (also known as psychometrics ). [193] : 44–5 James McKeen Cattell, a student of Wundt and Galton, brought the idea of psychological testing to the United States, and in fact coined the term "mental test". [193] : 45–6 In 1901, Cattell's student Clark Wissler published discouraging results, suggesting that mental testing of Columbia and Barnard students failed to predict academic performance. [193] : 45–6 In response to 1904 orders from the Minister of Public Instruction , One example of an observational study was run by Arthur Bandura. This observational study focused on children who were exposed to an adult exhibiting aggressive behaviors and their reaction to toys versus other children who were not exposed to these stimuli. The result shows that children who had seen the adult acting aggressively towards a toy, in turn, were aggressive towards their own toy when put in a situation that frustrated them. [194] psychologists Alfred Binet and Théodore Simon developed and elaborated a new test of intelligence in 1905–1911. They used a range of questions diverse in their nature and difficulty. Binet and Simon introduced the concept of mental age and referred to the lowest scorers on their test as idiots . Henry H. Goddard put the Binet-Simon scale to work and introduced classifications of mental level such as imbecile and feebleminded. In 1916, (after Binet's death), Stanford professor Lewis M. Terman modified the Binet-Simon scale (renamed the Stanford–Binet scale ) and introduced the intelligence quotient as a score report. [193] : 50–56 Based on his test findings, and reflecting the racism common to that era, Terman concluded that intellectual disability "represents the level of intelligence which is very, very common among Spanish-Indians and Mexican families of the Southwest and also among negroes. Their dullness seems to be racial." [195] Following the Army Alpha and Army Beta tests, which was developed by psychologist Robert Yerkes in 1917 and then used in World War 1 by industrial and organizational psychologists for large-scale employee testing and selection of military personnel. [196] Mental testing also became popular in the U.S., where it was applied to schoolchildren. The federally created National Intelligence Test was administered to 7 million children in the 1920s. In 1926, the College Entrance Examination Board created the Scholastic Aptitude Test to standardize college admissions. [193] : 61 The results of intelligence tests were used to argue for segregated schools and economic functions, including the preferential training of Black Americans for manual labor. These practices were criticized by Black intellectuals such a Horace Mann Bond and Allison Davis . [195] Eugenicists used mental testing to justify and organize compulsory sterilization of individuals classified as mentally retarded (now referred to as intellectual disability ). [45] In the United States, tens of thousands of men and women were sterilized. Setting a precedent that has never been overturned, the U.S. Supreme Court affirmed the constitutionality of this practice in the 1927 case Buck v. Bell . [197] Today mental testing is a routine phenomenon for people of all ages in Western societies. [193] : 2 Modern testing aspires to criteria including standardization of procedure, consistency of results , output of an interpretable score, statistical norms describing population outcomes, and, ideally, effective prediction of behavior and life outcomes outside of testing situations. [193] : 4–6 Psychological testing is regularly used in forensic contexts to aid legal judgments and decisions. [198] Developments in psychometrics include work on test and scale reliability and validity . [199] Developments in item-response theory , [200] structural equation modeling , [201] and bifactor analysis [202] have helped in strengthening test and scale construction. Mental health care See also: Clinical psychology The provision of psychological health services is generally called clinical psychology in the U.S. Sometimes, however, members of the school psychology and counseling psychology professions engage in practices that resemble that of clinical psychologists. Clinical psychologists typically include people who have graduated from doctoral programs in clinical psychology. In Canada, some of the members of the abovementioned groups usually fall within the larger category of professional psychology . In Canada and the U.S., practitioners get bachelor's degrees and doctorates; doctoral students in clinical psychology usually spend one year in a predoctoral internship and one year in postdoctoral internship. In Mexico and most other Latin American and European countries, psychologists do not get bachelor's and doctoral degrees; instead, they take a three-year professional course following high school. [93] Clinical psychology is at present the largest specialization within psychology. [203] It includes the study and application of psychology for the purpose of understanding, preventing, and relieving psychological distress, dysfunction, and/or mental illness . Clinical psychologists also try to promote subjective well-being and personal growth. Central to the practice of clinical psychology are psychological assessment and psychotherapy although clinical psychologists may also engage in research, teaching, consultation, forensic testimony, and program development and administration. [204] Credit for the first psychology clinic in the United States typically goes to Lightner Witmer , who established his practice in Philadelphia in 1896. Another modern psychotherapist was Morton Prince , an early advocate for the establishment of psychology as a clinical and academic discipline. [203] In the first part of the twentieth century, most mental health care in the United States was performed by psychiatrists, who are medical doctors. Psychology entered the field with its refinements of mental testing, which promised to improve the diagnosis of mental problems. For their part, some psychiatrists became interested in using psychoanalysis and other forms of psychodynamic psychotherapy to understand and treat the mentally ill. [40] [205] Psychotherapy as conducted by psychiatrists blurred the distinction between psychiatry and psychology, and this trend continued with the rise of community mental health facilities . Some in the clinical psychology community adopted behavioral therapy , a thoroughly non-psychodynamic model that used behaviorist learning theory to change the actions of patients. A key aspect of behavior therapy is empirical evaluation of the treatment's effectiveness. In the 1970s, cognitive-behavior therapy emerged with the work of Albert Ellis and Aaron Beck . Although there are similarities between behavior therapy and cognitive-behavior therapy, cognitive-behavior therapy required the application of cognitive constructs. Since the 1970s, the popularity of cognitive-behavior therapy among clinical psychologists increased. A key practice in behavioral and cognitive-behavioral therapy is exposing patients to things they fear, based on the premise that their responses (fear, panic, anxiety) can be deconditioned. [206] Mental health care today involves psychologists and social workers in increasing numbers. In 1977, National Institute of Mental Health director Bertram Brown described this shift as a source of "intense competition and role confusion." [40] Graduate programs issuing doctorates in clinical psychology emerged in the 1950s and underwent rapid increase through the 1980s. The PhD degree is intended to train practitioners who could also conduct scientific research. The PsyD degree is more exclusively designed to train practitioners. [93] Some clinical psychologists focus on the clinical management of patients with brain injury. This subspecialty is known as clinical neuropsychology . In many countries, clinical psychology is a regulated mental health profession. The emerging field of disaster psychology (see crisis intervention ) involves professionals who respond to large-scale traumatic events. [207] The work performed by clinical psychologists tends to be influenced by various therapeutic approaches, all of which involve a formal relationship between professional and client (usually an individual, couple, family, or small group). Typically, these approaches encourage new ways of thinking, feeling, or behaving. Four major theoretical perspectives are psychodynamic, cognitive behavioral, existential–humanistic, and systems or family therapy. There has been a growing movement to integrate the various therapeutic approaches, especially with an increased understanding of issues regarding culture, gender, spirituality, and sexual orientation. With the advent of more robust research findings regarding psychotherapy, there is evidence that most of the major therapies have equal effectiveness, with the key common element being a strong therapeutic alliance . [208] [209] Because of this, more training programs and psychologists are now adopting an eclectic therapeutic orientation . [210] [211] [212] [213] [214] Diagnosis in clinical psychology usually follows the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). [215] The study of mental illnesses is called abnormal psychology . Education Main articles: Educational psychology and School psychology An item from a cognitive abilities test used in educational psychology Educational psychology is the study of how humans learn in educational settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of teaching, and the social psychology of schools as organizations. Educational psychologists can be found in preschools, schools of all levels including post secondary institutions, community organizations and learning centers, Government or private research firms, and independent or private consultant. [216] The work of developmental psychologists such as Lev Vygotsky, Jean Piaget , and Jerome Bruner has been influential in creating teaching methods and educational practices. Educational psychology is often included in teacher education programs in places such as North America, Australia, and New Zealand. School psychology combines principles from educational psychology and clinical psychology to understand and treat students with learning disabilities; to foster the intellectual growth of gifted students; to facilitate prosocial behaviors in adolescents; and otherwise to promote safe, supportive, and effective learning environments. School psychologists are trained in educational and behavioral assessment, intervention, prevention, and consultation, and many have extensive training in research. [217] Work See also: Industrial and organizational psychology and Organizational behavior Industrial and organizational (I/O) psychology involves research and practices that apply psychological theories and principles to organizations and individuals' work-lives. [218] In the field's beginnings, industrialists brought the nascent field of psychology to bear on the study of scientific management techniques for improving workplace efficiency. The field was at first called economic psychology or business psychology; later, industrial psychology, employment psychology, or psychotechnology. [219] An influential early study examined workers at Western Electric's Hawthorne plant in Cicero, Illinois from 1924 to 1932. Western Electric experimented on factory workers to assess their responses to changes in illumination, breaks, food, and wages. The researchers came to focus on workers' responses to observation itself, and the term Hawthorne effect is now used to describe the fact that people's behavior can change when they think they are being observed. [220] Although the Hawthorne research can be found in psychology textbooks, the research and its findings were weak at best. [221] [222] The name industrial and organizational psychology emerged in the 1960s. In 1973, it became enshrined in the name of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology , Division 14 of the American Psychological Association. [219] One goal of the discipline is to optimize human potential in the workplace. Personnel psychology is a subfield of I/O psychology. Personnel psychologists apply the methods and principles of psychology in selecting and evaluating workers. Another subfield, organizational psychology , examines the effects of work environments and management styles on worker motivation, job satisfaction, and productivity. [223] Most I/O psychologists work outside of academia, for private and public organizations and as consultants. [219] A psychology consultant working in business today might expect to provide executives with information and ideas about their industry, their target markets, and the organization of their company. [224] [225] Organizational behavior (OB) is an allied field involved in the study of human behavior within organizations. [226] One way to differentiate I/O psychology from OB is that I/O psychologists train in university psychology departments and OB specialists, in business schools. Military and intelligence One role for psychologists in the military has been to evaluate and counsel soldiers and other personnel. In the U.S., this function began during World War I, when Robert Yerkes established the School of Military Psychology at Fort Oglethorpe in Georgia. The school provided psychological training for military staff. [40] [227] Today, U.S. Army psychologists perform psychological screening, clinical psychotherapy, suicide prevention , and treatment for post-traumatic stress, as well as provide prevention-related services, for example, smoking cessation. [228] The United States Army's Mental Health Advisory Teams implement psychological interventions to help combat troops experiencing mental problems. [229] [230] Psychologists may also work on a diverse set of campaigns known broadly as psychological warfare. Psychological warfare chiefly involves the use of propaganda to influence enemy soldiers and civilians. This so-called black propaganda is designed to seem as if it originates from a source other than the Army. [231] The CIA 's MKULTRA program involved more individualized efforts at mind control , involving techniques such as hypnosis, torture, and covert involuntary administration of LSD . [232] The U.S. military used the name Psychological Operations (PSYOP) until 2010, when these activities were reclassified as Military Information Support Operations (MISO), part of Information Operations (IO). [233] Psychologists have sometimes been involved in assisting the interrogation and torture of suspects, staining the records of the psychologists involved. [234] Health, well-being, and social change See also: Health psychology , Social issues , and Occupational health psychology Social change An example of the contribution of psychologists to social change involves the research of Kenneth and Mamie Phipps Clark . These two African American psychologists studied segregation's adverse psychological impact on Black children. Their research findings played a role in the desegregation case Brown v. Board of Education (1954). [235] The impact of psychology on social change includes the discipline's broad influence on teaching and learning. Research has shown that compared to the "whole word" or "whole language" approach, the phonics approach to reading instruction is more efficacious. [236] Medical applications Medical facilities increasingly employ psychologists to perform various roles. One aspect of health psychology is the psychoeducation of patients: instructing them in how to follow a medical regimen. Health psychologists can also educate doctors and conduct research on patient compliance. [237] [238] Psychologists in the field of public health use a wide variety of interventions to influence human behavior. These range from public relations campaigns and outreach to governmental laws and policies. Psychologists study the composite influence of all these different tools in an effort to influence whole populations of people. [239] Worker health, safety and wellbeing Psychologists work with organizations to apply findings from psychological research to improve the health and well-being of employees. Some work as external consultants hired by organizations to solve specific problems, whereas others are full-time employees of the organization. Applications include conducting surveys to identify issues and designing interventions to make work healthier. Some of the specific health areas include: Accidents and injuries: A major contribution is the concept of safety climate , which is employee shared perceptions of the behaviors that are encouraged (e.g., wearing safety gear) and discouraged (not following safety rules) at work. [240] Organizations with strong safety climates have fewer work accidents and injuries. [241] Cardiovascular disease : Cardiovascular disease has been related to lack of job control . [242] Mental health: Exposure to occupational stress is associated with mental health disorder. [243] Musculoskeletal disorder : These are injuries in bones, nerves and tendons due to overexertion and repetitive strain. They have been linked to job satisfaction and workplace stress. [244] Physical health symptoms: Occupational stress has been linked to physical symptoms such as digestive distress and headache. [245] Workplace violence : Violence prevention climate is related to being physically assaulted and psychologically mistreated at work. [246] Interventions that improve climates are a way to address accidents and violence. Interventions that reduce stress at work or provide employees with tools to better manage it can help in areas where stress is an important component. Industrial psychology became interested in worker fatigue during World War I, when government ministers in Britain were concerned about the impact of fatigue on workers in munitions factories but not other types of factories. [247] [248] In the U. K. some interest in worker well-being emerged with the efforts of Charles Samuel Myers and his National Institute of Industrial Psychology (NIIP) during the inter-War years. [249] In the U. S. during the mid-twentieth century industrial psychologist Arthur Kornhauser pioneered the study of occupational mental health, linking industrial working conditions to mental health as well as the spillover of an unsatisfying job into a worker's personal life. [250] [251] Zickar accumulated evidence to show that "no other industrial psychologist of his era was as devoted to advocating management and labor practices that would improve the lives of working people." [250] Occupational health psychology As interest in the worker health expanded toward the end of the twentieth century, the field of occupational health psychology (OHP) emerged. OHP is a branch of psychology that is interdisciplinary. [48] [252] OHP is concerned with the health and safety of workers. [48] [252] OHP addresses topic areas such as the impact of occupational stressors on physical and mental health, mistreatment of workers (e.g., bullying and violence), work-family balance, the impact of involuntary unemployment on physical and mental health, the influence of psychosocial factors on safety and accidents, and interventions designed to improve/protect worker health. [48] [253] OHP grew out of health psychology , industrial and organizational psychology , and occupational medicine . [254] OHP has also been informed by disciplines outside psychology, including industrial engineering , sociology, and economics. [255] [256] Research methods Main articles: Psychological research and List of psychological research methods Quantitative psychological research lends itself to the statistical testing of hypotheses. Although the field makes abundant use of randomized and controlled experiments in laboratory settings, such research can only assess a limited range of short-term phenomena. Some psychologists rely on less rigorously controlled, but more ecologically valid , field experiments as well. Other research psychologists rely on statistical methods to glean knowledge from population data. [257] The statistical methods research psychologists employ include the Pearson product–moment correlation coefficient , the analysis of variance , multiple linear regression , logistic regression , structural equation modeling , and hierarchical linear modeling . The measurement and operationalization of important constructs is an essential part of these research designs. Although this type of psychological research is much less abundant than quantitative research, some psychologists conduct qualitative research . This type of research can involve interviews, questionnaires, and first-hand observation. [258] While hypothesis testing is rare, virtually impossible, in qualitative research, qualitative studies can be helpful in theory and hypothesis generation, interpreting seemingly contradictory quantitative findings, and understanding why some interventions fail and others succeed. [259] Controlled experiments Main article: Experiment Flowchart of the four phases, enrollment, intervention allocation, follow-up, and data analysis, of a parallel randomized trial of two groups modified from the CONSORT 2010 Statement [260] The experimenter (E) orders the teacher (T), the subject of the experiment, to give what the latter believes are painful electric shocks to a learner (L), who is actually an actor and confederate . The subject believes that for each wrong answer, the learner was receiving actual electric shocks, though in reality there were no such punishments. Being separated from the subject, the confederate set up a tape recorder integrated with the electro-shock generator, which played pre-recorded sounds for each shock level etc. [261] A true experiment with random assignment of research participants (sometimes called subjects) to rival conditions allows researchers to make strong inferences about causal relationships. When there are large numbers of research participants, the random assignment (also called random allocation) of those participants to rival conditions ensures that the individuals in those conditions will, on average, be similar on most characteristics, including characteristics that went unmeasured. In an experiment, the researcher alters one or more variables of influence, called independent variables , and measures resulting changes in the factors of interest, called dependent variables . Prototypical experimental research is conducted in a laboratory with a carefully controlled environment. A quasi-experiment is a situation in which different conditions are being studied, but random assignment to the different conditions is not possible. Investigators must work with preexisting groups of people. Researchers can use common sense to consider how much the nonrandom assignment threatens the study's validity . [262] For example, in research on the best way to affect reading achievement in the first three grades of school, school administrators may not permit educational psychologists to randomly assign children to phonics and whole language classrooms, in which case the psychologists must work with preexisting classroom assignments. Psychologists will compare the achievement of children attending phonics and whole language classes and, perhaps, statistically adjust for any initial differences in reading level. Experimental researchers typically use a statistical hypothesis testing model which involves making predictions before conducting the experiment, then assessing how well the data collected are consistent with the predictions. These predictions are likely to originate from one or more abstract scientific hypotheses about how the phenomenon under study actually works. [263] Other types of studies Further information: Video recall Surveys are used in psychology for the purpose of measuring attitudes and traits , monitoring changes in mood , and checking the validity of experimental manipulations (checking research participants' perception of the condition they were assigned to). Psychologists have commonly used paper-and-pencil surveys. However, surveys are also conducted over the phone or through e-mail. Web-based surveys are increasingly used to conveniently reach many subjects. Observational studies are commonly conducted in psychology. In cross-sectional observational studies, psychologists collect data at a single point in time. The goal of many cross-sectional studies is the assess the extent factors are correlated with each other. By contrast, in longitudinal studies psychologists collect data on the same sample at two or more points in time. Sometimes the purpose of longitudinal research is to study trends across time such as the stability of traits or age-related changes in behavior. Because some studies involve endpoints that psychologists cannot ethically study from an experimental standpoint, such as identifying the causes of depression, they conduct longitudinal studies a large group of depression-free people, periodically assessing what is happening in the individuals' lives. In this way psychologists have an opportunity to test causal hypotheses regarding conditions that commonly arise in people's lives that put them at risk for depression. Problems that affect longitudinal studies include selective attrition , the type of problem in which bias is introduced when a certain type of research participant disproportionately leaves a study. One example of an observational study was run by Arthur Bandura. This observational study focused on children who were exposed to an adult exhibiting aggressive behaviors and their reaction to toys versus other children who were not exposed to these stimuli. The result shows that children who had seen the adult acting aggressively towards a toy, in turn, were aggressive towards their own toy when put in a situation that frustrated them. [194] Exploratory data analysis includes a variety of practices that researchers use to reduce a great many variables to a small number overarching factors. In Peirce's three modes of inference , exploratory data analysis corresponds to abduction . [264] Meta-analysis is the technique research psychologists use to integrate results from many studies of the same variables and arriving at a grand average of the findings. [265] Direct brain observation/manipulation An EEG recording setup Artificial neural network with two layers, an interconnected group of nodes, akin to the vast network of neurons in the human brain A classic and popular tool used to relate mental and neural activity is the electroencephalogram (EEG), a technique using amplified electrodes on a person's scalp to measure voltage changes in different parts of the brain. Hans Berger , the first researcher to use EEG on an unopened skull, quickly found that brains exhibit signature "brain waves": electric oscillations which correspond to different states of consciousness. Researchers subsequently refined statistical methods for synthesizing the electrode data, and identified unique brain wave patterns such as the delta wave observed during non-REM sleep. [266] Newer functional neuroimaging techniques include functional magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography , both of which track the flow of blood through the brain. These technologies provide more localized information about activity in the brain and create representations of the brain with widespread appeal. They also provide insight which avoids the classic problems of subjective self-reporting. It remains challenging to draw hard conclusions about where in the brain specific thoughts originate—or even how usefully such localization corresponds with reality. However, neuroimaging has delivered unmistakable results showing the existence of correlations between mind and brain. Some of these draw on a systemic neural network model rather than a localized function model. [267] [268] [269] Interventions such as transcranial magnetic stimulation and drugs also provide information about brain–mind interactions. Psychopharmacology is the study of drug-induced mental effects. Computer simulation See also: Computational cognition , Graph theory , and Network theory Computational modeling is a tool used in mathematical psychology and cognitive psychology to simulate behavior. [270] This method has several advantages. Since modern computers process information quickly, simulations can be run in a short time, allowing for high statistical power. Modeling also allows psychologists to visualize hypotheses about the functional organization of mental events that could not be directly observed in a human. Computational neuroscience uses mathematical models to simulate the brain. Another method is symbolic modeling, which represents many mental objects using variables and rules. Other types of modeling include dynamic systems and stochastic modeling. Animal studies A rat undergoing a Morris water navigation test used in behavioral neuroscience to study the role of the hippocampus in spatial learning and memory Animal experiments aid in investigating many aspects of human psychology, including perception, emotion, learning, memory, and thought, to name a few. In the 1890s, Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov famously used dogs to demonstrate classical conditioning. Non-human primates, cats, dogs, pigeons, and rats and other rodents are often used in psychological experiments. Ideally, controlled experiments introduce only one independent variable at a time, in order to ascertain its unique effects upon dependent variables. These conditions are approximated best in laboratory settings. In contrast, human environments and genetic backgrounds vary so widely, and depend upon so many factors, that it is difficult to control important variables for human subjects. There are pitfalls, however, in generalizing findings from animal studies to humans through animal models. [271] Comparative psychology is the scientific study of the behavior and mental processes of non-human animals, especially as these relate to the phylogenetic history, adaptive significance, and development of behavior. Research in this area explores the behavior of many species, from insects to primates. It is closely related to other disciplines that study animal behavior such as ethology . [272] Research in comparative psychology sometimes appears to shed light on human behavior, but some attempts to connect the two have been quite controversial, for example the Sociobiology of E.O. Wilson . [273] Animal models are often used to study neural processes related to human behavior, e.g. in cognitive neuroscience. Qualitative research Phineas P. Gage survived an accident in which a large iron rod was driven completely through his head, destroying much of his brain's left frontal lobe, but the injury altered his personality and behavior. [274] Qualitative research is often designed to answer questions about the thoughts, feelings, and behaviors of individuals. Qualitative research involving first-hand observation can help describe events as they occur, with the goal of capturing the richness of everyday behavior and with the hope of discovering and understanding phenomena that might have been missed if only more cursory examinations are made. Qualitative psychological research methods include interviews, first-hand observation, and participant observation. Creswell (2003) identified five main possibilities for qualitative research, including narrative, phenomenology, ethnography , case study , and grounded theory . Qualitative researchers [275] sometimes aim to enrich our understanding of symbols, subjective experiences, or social structures. Sometimes hermeneutic and critical aims can give rise to quantitative research, as in Erich Fromm 's application of psychological and sociological theories, in his book Escape from Freedom , to understanding why many ordinary Germans supported Hitler. [276] Just as Jane Goodall studied chimpanzee social and family life by careful observation of chimpanzee behavior in the field, psychologists conduct naturalistic observation of ongoing human social, professional, and family life. Sometimes the participants are aware they are being observed, and other times the participants do not know they are being observed. Strict ethical guidelines must be followed when covert observation is being carried out. Program evaluation Program evaluation involves the systematic collection, analysis, and application of information to answer questions about projects, policies and programs, particularly about their effectiveness. [277] [278] In both the public and private sectors, stakeholders often want to know the extent which the programs they are funding, implementing, voting for, receiving, or objecting to are producing the intended effects. While program evaluation first focuses on effectiveness, important considerations often include how much the program costs per participant, how the program could be improved, whether the program is worthwhile, whether there are better alternatives, if there are unintended outcomes, and whether the program goals are appropriate and useful. [279] Contemporary issues Metascience Metascience involves the application of scientific methodology to study science itself. The field of metascience has revealed problems in psychological research. Some psychological research has suffered from bias , [280] problematic reproducibility , [281] and misuse of statistics . [282] These findings have led to calls for reform from within and from outside the scientific community. [283] Confirmation bias In 1959, statistician Theodore Sterling examined the results of psychological studies and discovered that 97% of them supported their initial hypotheses, implying possible publication bias . [284] [285] [286] Similarly, Fanelli (2010) [287] found that 91.5% of psychiatry/psychology studies confirmed the effects they were looking for, and concluded that the odds of this happening (a positive result) was around five times higher than in fields such as space science or geosciences . Fanelli argued that this is because researchers in "softer" sciences have fewer constraints to their conscious and unconscious biases. Replication Further information: Replication crisis § In psychology A replication crisis in psychology has emerged. Many notable findings in the field have not been replicated. Some researchers were even accused of publishing fraudulent results. [288] [289] [290] Systematic efforts, including efforts by the Reproducibility Project of the Center for Open Science , to assess the extent of the problem found that as many as two-thirds of highly publicized findings in psychology failed to be replicated. [291] Reproducibility has generally been stronger in cognitive psychology (in studies and journals) than social psychology [291] and subfields of differential psychology . [292] [293] Other subfields of psychology have also been implicated in the replication crisis, including clinical psychology, [294] [295] [296] developmental psychology, [297] [298] [299] and a field closely related to psychology, educational research . [300] [301] [302] [303] [304] Focus on the replication crisis has led to other renewed efforts in the discipline to re-test important findings. [305] [306] In response to concerns about publication bias and data dredging (conducting a large number of statistical tests on a great many variables but restricting reporting to the results that were statistically significant), 295 psychology and medical journals have adopted result-blind peer review where studies are accepted not on the basis of their findings and after the studies are completed, but before the studies are conducted and upon the basis of the methodological rigor of their experimental designs and the theoretical justifications for their proposed statistical analysis before data collection or analysis is conducted. [307] [308] In addition, large-scale collaborations among researchers working in multiple labs in different countries have taken place. The collaborators regularly make their data openly available for different researchers to assess. [309] Allen and Mehler [310] estimated that 61 per cent of result-blind studies have yielded null results , in contrast to an estimated 5 to 20 per cent in traditional research. Misuse of statistics Further information: Misuse of statistics and Misuse of p-values Some critics view statistical hypothesis testing as misplaced. Psychologist and statistician Jacob Cohen wrote in 1994 that psychologists routinely confuse statistical significance with practical importance, enthusiastically reporting great certainty in unimportant facts. [311] Some psychologists have responded with an increased use of effect size statistics, rather than sole reliance on p-values. [312] WEIRD bias See also: Cultural psychology , Indigenous psychology , Transnational psychology , and Cross-cultural psychology In 2008, Arnett pointed out that most articles in American Psychological Association journals were about U.S. populations when U.S. citizens are only 5% of the world's population. He complained that psychologists had no basis for assuming psychological processes to be universal and generalizing research findings to the rest of the global population. [313] In 2010, Henrich, Heine, and Norenzayan reported a bias in conducting psychology studies with participants from "WEIRD" ("Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic") societies. [314] [315] Henrich et al. found that "96% of psychological samples come from countries with only 12% of the world's population" (p. 63). The article gave examples of results that differ significantly between people from WEIRD and tribal cultures, including the Müller-Lyer illusion . Arnett (2008), Altmaier and Hall (2008) and Morgan-Consoli et al. (2018) view the Western bias in research and theory as a serious problem considering psychologists are increasingly applying psychological principles developed in WEIRD regions in their research, clinical work, and consultation with populations around the world. [313] [316] [317] In 2018, Rad, Martingano, and Ginges showed that nearly a decade after Henrich et al.'s paper, over 80% of the samples used in studies published in the journal Psychological Science employed WEIRD samples. Moreover, their analysis showed that several studies did not fully disclose the origin of their samples; the authors offered a set of recommendations to editors and reviewers to reduce WEIRD bias. [318] STRANGE bias Similar to the WEIRD bias, starting in 2020, researchers of non-human behavior have started to emphasize the need to document the possibility of the STRANGE (Social background, Trappability and self-selection, Rearing history, Acclimation and habituation, Natural changes in responsiveness, Genetic makeup, and Experience) bias in study conclusions. [319] Unscientific mental health training Some observers perceive a gap between scientific theory and its application—in particular, the application of unsupported or unsound clinical practices. [320] Critics say there has been an increase in the number of mental health training programs that do not instill scientific competence. [321] Practices such as " facilitated communication for infantile autism"; memory-recovery techniques including body work ; and other therapies, such as rebirthing and reparenting , may be dubious or even dangerous, despite their popularity. [322] These practices, however, are outside the mainstream practices taught in clinical psychology doctoral programs. Ethics Ethical standards in the discipline have changed over time. Some famous past studies are today considered unethical and in violation of established codes (the Canadian Code of Conduct for Research Involving Humans, and the Belmont Report ). The American Psychological Association has advanced a set of ethical principles and a code of conduct for the profession. [323] The most important contemporary standards include informed and voluntary consent. After World War II, the Nuremberg Code was established because of Nazi abuses of experimental subjects. Later, most countries (and scientific journals) adopted the Declaration of Helsinki . In the U.S., the National Institutes of Health established the Institutional Review Board in 1966, and in 1974 adopted the National Research Act (HR 7724). All of these measures encouraged researchers to obtain informed consent from human participants in experimental studies. A number of influential but ethically dubious studies led to the establishment of this rule; such studies included the MIT-Harvard Fernald School radioisotope studies , the Thalidomide tragedy , the Willowbrook hepatitis study , and Stanley Milgram's studies of obedience to authority . Humans Universities have ethics committees dedicated to protecting the rights (e.g., voluntary nature of participation in the research, privacy) and well-being (e.g., minimizing distress) of research participants. University ethics committees evaluate proposed research to ensure that researchers protect the rights and well-being of participants; an investigator's research project cannot be conducted unless approved by such an ethics committee. [324] The ethics code of the American Psychological Association originated in 1951 as "Ethical Standards of Psychologists". This code has guided the formation of licensing laws in most American states. It has changed multiple times over the decades since its adoption. In 1989, the APA revised its policies on advertising and referral fees to negotiate the end of an investigation by the Federal Trade Commission. The 1992 incarnation was the first to distinguish between "aspirational" ethical standards and "enforceable" ones. Members of the public have a five-year window to file ethics complaints about APA members with the APA ethics committee; members of the APA have a three-year window. [325] Some of the ethical issues considered most important are the requirement to practice only within the area of competence, to maintain confidentiality with the patients, and to avoid sexual relations with them. Another important principle is informed consent , the idea that a patient or research subject must understand and freely choose a procedure they are undergoing. [325] Some of the most common complaints against clinical psychologists include sexual misconduct. [325] Other animals Research on other animals is governed by university ethics committees. Research on nonhuman animals cannot proceed without permission of the ethics committee, of the researcher's home institution. Ethical guidelines state that using non-human animals for scientific purposes is only acceptable when the harm (physical or psychological) done to animals is outweighed by the benefits of the research. [326] Psychologists can use certain research techniques on animals that could not be used on humans. Comparative psychologist Harry Harlow drew moral condemnation for isolation experiments on rhesus macaque monkeys at the University of Wisconsin–Madison in the 1970s. [327] The aim of the research was to produce an animal model of clinical depression . Harlow also devised what he called a "rape rack", to which the female isolates were tied in normal monkey mating posture. [328] In 1974, American literary critic Wayne C. Booth wrote that, "Harry Harlow and his colleagues go on torturing their nonhuman primates decade after decade, invariably proving what we all knew in advance—that social creatures can be destroyed by destroying their social ties." He writes that Harlow made no mention of the criticism of the morality of his work. [329] Animal research is influential in psychology, while still being debated among academics. The testing of animals for research has led to medical breakthroughs in human medicine. Many psychologists argue animal experimentation is essential for human advancement, but must be regulated by the government to ensure ethicality. References ^ Frequently asked questions about APA Retrieved on November 28th, 2023. ^ Fernald LD (2008). Psychology: Six perspectives Archived 8 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine (pp.12–15). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. ^ Hockenbury & Hockenbury. Psychology. Worth Publishers, 2010. ^ Psychoanalysis and other forms of depth psychology are most typically associated with theories about the unconscious mind. By contrast, behaviorists consider such phenomena as classical conditioning and operant conditioning . Cognitivists explore implicit memory , automaticity , and subliminal messages , all of which are understood either to bypass or to occur outside of conscious effort or attention. Indeed, cognitive-behavioral therapists counsel their clients to become aware of maladaptive thought patterns, the nature of which the clients previously had not been conscious. ^ O'Neil, H.F.; cited in Coon, D.; Mitterer, J.O. (2008). Introduction to psychology: Gateways to mind and behavior Archived 18 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine (12th ed., pp. 15–16). Stamford, CT: Cengage Learning. ^ "The mission of the APA [American Psychological Association] is to advance the creation, communication and application of psychological knowledge to benefit society and improve people's lives"; APA (2010). About APA. Archived 2 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 20 October 2010. Farberow NL, Eiduson B (1971). "To petition to join APA as a section of Division 12, the Division of Clinical Psychology" . Journal of Personality Assessment. 35 (3). Taylor & Francis Online: 205–206. doi : 10.1080/00223891.1971.10119654 . Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. Clinical psychology is the practice of psychology, especially as a means of furthering human welfare and knowledge. ^ Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2010–11 Edition, Psychologists, on the Internet at bls.gov Archived 4 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine (visited 8 July 2010). ^ Online Etymology Dictionary. (2001). "Psychology" Archived 18 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine .
Toggle the table of contents Economics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social science Economics ( /ˌɛkəˈnɒmɪks, ˌiːkə-/ ) [1] is a social science that studies the production , distribution , and consumption of goods and services . [2] [3] Economics focuses on the behaviour and interactions of economic agents and how economies work. Microeconomics analyzes what's viewed as basic elements in the economy, including individual agents and markets , their interactions, and the outcomes of interactions. Individual agents may include, for example, households, firms, buyers, and sellers. Macroeconomics analyzes the economy as a system where production, consumption, saving, and investment interact, and factors affecting it: employment of the resources of labour, capital, and land, currency inflation , economic growth , and public policies that have impact on these elements . Main article: Definitions of economics The earlier term for the discipline was 'political economy', but since the late 19th century, it has commonly been called 'economics'. [21] The term is ultimately derived from Ancient Greek οἰκονομία (oikonomia) which is a term for the "way (nomos) to run a household (oikos)", or in other words the know-how of an οἰκονομικός (oikonomikos), or "household or homestead manager". Derived terms such as "economy" can therefore often mean "frugal" or "thrifty". [22] [23] [24] [25] By extension then, "political economy" was the way to manage a polis or state. There are a variety of modern definitions of economics ; some reflect evolving views of the subject or different views among economists. [26] [27] Scottish philosopher Adam Smith (1776) defined what was then called political economy as "an inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations", in particular as: a branch of the science of a statesman or legislator [with the twofold objectives of providing] a plentiful revenue or subsistence for the people ... [and] to supply the state or commonwealth with a revenue for the publick services. [28] Jean-Baptiste Say (1803), distinguishing the subject matter from its public-policy uses, defined it as the science of production, distribution, and consumption of wealth . [29] On the satirical side, Thomas Carlyle (1849) coined " the dismal science " as an epithet for classical economics , in this context, commonly linked to the pessimistic analysis of Malthus (1798). [30] John Stuart Mill (1844) delimited the subject matter further: The science which traces the laws of such of the phenomena of society as arise from the combined operations of mankind for the production of wealth, in so far as those phenomena are not modified by the pursuit of any other object. [31] Alfred Marshall provided a still widely cited definition in his textbook Principles of Economics (1890) that extended analysis beyond wealth and from the societal to the microeconomic level: Economics is a study of man in the ordinary business of life. It enquires how he gets his income and how he uses it. Thus, it is on the one side, the study of wealth and on the other and more important side, a part of the study of man. [32] Lionel Robbins (1932) developed implications of what has been termed "[p]erhaps the most commonly accepted current definition of the subject": [27] Economics is the science which studies human behaviour as a relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses. [33] Robbins described the definition as not classificatory in "pick[ing] out certain kinds of behaviour" but rather analytical in "focus[ing] attention on a particular aspect of behaviour, the form imposed by the influence of scarcity ." [34] He affirmed that previous economists have usually centred their studies on the analysis of wealth: how wealth is created (production), distributed, and consumed; and how wealth can grow. [35] But he said that economics can be used to study other things, such as war, that are outside its usual focus. This is because war has as the goal winning it (as a sought after end), generates both cost and benefits; and, resources (human life and other costs) are used to attain the goal. If the war is not winnable or if the expected costs outweigh the benefits, the deciding actors (assuming they are rational) may never go to war (a decision) but rather explore other alternatives. Economics cannot be defined as the science that studies wealth, war, crime, education, and any other field economic analysis can be applied to; but, as the science that studies a particular common aspect of each of those subjects (they all use scarce resources to attain a sought after end). Some subsequent comments criticized the definition as overly broad in failing to limit its subject matter to analysis of markets. From the 1960s, however, such comments abated as the economic theory of maximizing behaviour and rational-choice modelling expanded the domain of the subject to areas previously treated in other fields. [36] There are other criticisms as well, such as in scarcity not accounting for the macroeconomics of high unemployment. [37] Gary Becker , a contributor to the expansion of economics into new areas, described the approach he favoured as "combin[ing the] assumptions of maximizing behaviour, stable preferences , and market equilibrium , used relentlessly and unflinchingly." [38] One commentary characterizes the remark as making economics an approach rather than a subject matter but with great specificity as to the "choice process and the type of social interaction that [such] analysis involves." The same source reviews a range of definitions included in principles of economics textbooks and concludes that the lack of agreement need not affect the subject-matter that the texts treat. Among economists more generally, it argues that a particular definition presented may reflect the direction toward which the author believes economics is evolving, or should evolve. [27] Many economists including nobel prize winners James M. Buchanan and Ronald Coase reject the method-based definition of Robbins and continue to prefer definitions like those of Say, in terms of its subject matter. [36] Ha-Joon Chang has for example argued that the definition of Robbins would make economics very peculiar because all other sciences define themselves in terms of the area of inquiry or object of inquiry rather than the methodology. In the biology department, they do not say that all biology should be studied with DNA analysis. People study living organisms in many different ways, so some people will do DNA analysis, others might do anatomy, and still others might build game theoretic models of animal behavior. But they are all called biology because they all study living organisms. According to Ha Joon Chang, this view that the economy can and should be studied in only one way (for example by studying only rational choices), and going even one step further and basically redefining economics as a theory of everything, is very peculiar. [39] History of economic thought This section is missing information about information and behavioural economics, contemporary microeconomics. Please expand the section to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page . (September 2020) From antiquity through the physiocrats Questions regarding distribution of resources are found throughout the writings of the Boeotian poet Hesiod and several economic historians have described Hesiod himself as the "first economist". [40] However, the word Oikos , the Greek word from which the word economy derives, was used for issues regarding how to manage a household (which was understood to be the landowner, his family, and his slaves [41] ) rather than to refer to some normative societal system of distribution of resources, which is a much more recent phenomenon. [42] [43] [44] Xenophon , the author of the Oeconomicus , is credited by philologues for being the source of the word economy. [45] Other notable writers from Antiquity through to the Renaissance which wrote on include Aristotle , Chanakya (also known as Kautilya), Qin Shi Huang , Ibn Khaldun , and Thomas Aquinas . Joseph Schumpeter described 16th and 17th century scholastic writers, including Tomás de Mercado , Luis de Molina , and Juan de Lugo , as "coming nearer than any other group to being the 'founders' of scientific economics" as to monetary , interest , and value theory within a natural-law perspective. [46] A 1638 painting of a French seaport during the heyday of mercantilism Two groups, who later were called "mercantilists" and "physiocrats", more directly influenced the subsequent development of the subject. Both groups were associated with the rise of economic nationalism and modern capitalism in Europe. Mercantilism was an economic doctrine that flourished from the 16th to 18th century in a prolific pamphlet literature, whether of merchants or statesmen. It held that a nation's wealth depended on its accumulation of gold and silver. Nations without access to mines could obtain gold and silver from trade only by selling goods abroad and restricting imports other than of gold and silver. The doctrine called for importing cheap raw materials to be used in manufacturing goods, which could be exported, and for state regulation to impose protective tariffs on foreign manufactured goods and prohibit manufacturing in the colonies. [47] Physiocrats , a group of 18th-century French thinkers and writers, developed the idea of the economy as a circular flow of income and output. Physiocrats believed that only agricultural production generated a clear surplus over cost, so that agriculture was the basis of all wealth. [48] Thus, they opposed the mercantilist policy of promoting manufacturing and trade at the expense of agriculture, including import tariffs. Physiocrats advocated replacing administratively costly tax collections with a single tax on income of land owners. In reaction against copious mercantilist trade regulations, the physiocrats advocated a policy of laissez-faire , which called for minimal government intervention in the economy. [49] Adam Smith (1723–1790) was an early economic theorist. [50] Smith was harshly critical of the mercantilists but described the physiocratic system "with all its imperfections" as "perhaps the purest approximation to the truth that has yet been published" on the subject. [51] Classical political economy Main article: Classical economics The publication of Adam Smith 's The Wealth of Nations in 1776 is considered to be the first formalisation of economic thought. The publication of Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations in 1776, has been described as "the effective birth of economics as a separate discipline." [52] The book identified land, labour, and capital as the three factors of production and the major contributors to a nation's wealth, as distinct from the physiocratic idea that only agriculture was productive. Smith discusses potential benefits of specialization by division of labour , including increased labour productivity and gains from trade , whether between town and country or across countries. [53] His "theorem" that "the division of labor is limited by the extent of the market" has been described as the "core of a theory of the functions of firm and industry " and a "fundamental principle of economic organization." [54] To Smith has also been ascribed "the most important substantive proposition in all of economics" and foundation of resource-allocation theory—that, under competition , resource owners (of labour, land, and capital) seek their most profitable uses, resulting in an equal rate of return for all uses in equilibrium (adjusted for apparent differences arising from such factors as training and unemployment). [55] In an argument that includes "one of the most famous passages in all economics," [56] Smith represents every individual as trying to employ any capital they might command for their own advantage, not that of the society, [a] and for the sake of profit, which is necessary at some level for employing capital in domestic industry, and positively related to the value of produce. [58] In this: He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for the society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it. [59] The Rev. Thomas Robert Malthus (1798) used the concept of diminishing returns to explain low living standards. Human population , he argued, tended to increase geometrically, outstripping the production of food, which increased arithmetically. The force of a rapidly growing population against a limited amount of land meant diminishing returns to labour. The result, he claimed, was chronically low wages, which prevented the standard of living for most of the population from rising above the subsistence level. [60] [ non-primary source needed ] Economist Julian Lincoln Simon has criticized Malthus's conclusions. [61] While Adam Smith emphasized production and income, David Ricardo (1817) focused on the distribution of income among landowners, workers, and capitalists. Ricardo saw an inherent conflict between landowners on the one hand and labour and capital on the other. He posited that the growth of population and capital, pressing against a fixed supply of land, pushes up rents and holds down wages and profits. Ricardo was also the first to state and prove the principle of comparative advantage , according to which each country should specialize in producing and exporting goods in that it has a lower relative cost of production, rather relying only on its own production. [62] It has been termed a "fundamental analytical explanation" for gains from trade . [63] Coming at the end of the classical tradition, John Stuart Mill (1848) parted company with the earlier classical economists on the inevitability of the distribution of income produced by the market system. Mill pointed to a distinct difference between the market's two roles: allocation of resources and distribution of income. The market might be efficient in allocating resources but not in distributing income, he wrote, making it necessary for society to intervene. [64] Value theory was important in classical theory. Smith wrote that the "real price of every thing ... is the toil and trouble of acquiring it". Smith maintained that, with rent and profit, other costs besides wages also enter the price of a commodity. [65] Other classical economists presented variations on Smith, termed the ' labour theory of value '. Classical economics focused on the tendency of any market economy to settle in a final stationary state made up of a constant stock of physical wealth (capital) and a constant population size . The Marxist critique of political economy comes from the work of German philosopher Karl Marx . Marxian economics Main article: Marxian economics Marxist (later, Marxian) economics descends from classical economics and it derives from the work of Karl Marx . The first volume of Marx's major work, Das Kapital , was published in 1867. Marx focused on the labour theory of value and theory of surplus value which, he believed, explained the exploitation of labour by capital. [66] The labour theory of value held that the value of an exchanged commodity was determined by the labour that went into its production, and the theory of surplus value demonstrated how workers were only paid a proportion of the value their work had created. [67] Main article: Neoclassical economics At its inception as a social science, economics was defined and discussed at length as the study of production, distribution, and consumption of wealth by Jean-Baptiste Say in his Treatise on Political Economy or, The Production, Distribution, and Consumption of Wealth (1803). These three items were considered only in relation to the increase or diminution of wealth, and not in reference to their processes of execution. [b] Say's definition has survived in part up to the present, modified by substituting the word "wealth" for "goods and services" meaning that wealth may include non-material objects as well. One hundred and thirty years later, Lionel Robbins noticed that this definition no longer sufficed, [c] because many economists were making theoretical and philosophical inroads in other areas of human activity. In his Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science , he proposed a definition of economics as a study of human behaviour, subject to and constrained by scarcity, [d] which forces people to choose, allocate scarce resources to competing ends, and economize (seeking the greatest welfare while avoiding the wasting of scarce resources). According to Robbins: "Economics is the science which studies human behavior as a relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses". [34] Robbins' definition eventually became widely accepted by mainstream economists, and found its way into current textbooks. [68] Although far from unanimous, most mainstream economists would accept some version of Robbins' definition, even though many have raised serious objections to the scope and method of economics, emanating from that definition. [69] A body of theory later termed "neoclassical economics" formed from about 1870 to 1910. The term "economics" was popularized by such neoclassical economists as Alfred Marshall and Mary Paley Marshall as a concise synonym for "economic science" and a substitute for the earlier " political economy ". [24] [25] This corresponded to the influence on the subject of mathematical methods used in the natural sciences . [70] Neoclassical economics systematically integrated supply and demand as joint determinants of both price and quantity in market equilibrium, influencing the allocation of output and income distribution. It rejected the classical economics' labour theory of value in favor of a marginal utility theory of value on the demand side and a more comprehensive theory of costs on the supply side. [71] In the 20th century, neoclassical theorists departed from an earlier idea that suggested measuring total utility for a society, opting instead for ordinal utility , which posits behavior-based relations across individuals. [72] [73] In microeconomics , neoclassical economics represents incentives and costs as playing a pervasive role in shaping decision making . An immediate example of this is the consumer theory of individual demand, which isolates how prices (as costs) and income affect quantity demanded. [72] In macroeconomics it is reflected in an early and lasting neoclassical synthesis with Keynesian macroeconomics. [74] [72] Neoclassical economics is occasionally referred as orthodox economics whether by its critics or sympathizers. Modern mainstream economics builds on neoclassical economics but with many refinements that either supplement or generalize earlier analysis, such as econometrics , game theory , analysis of market failure and imperfect competition , and the neoclassical model of economic growth for analysing long-run variables affecting national income . Neoclassical economics studies the behaviour of individuals , households , and organizations (called economic actors, players, or agents), when they manage or use scarce resources, which have alternative uses, to achieve desired ends. Agents are assumed to act rationally, have multiple desirable ends in sight, limited resources to obtain these ends, a set of stable preferences, a definite overall guiding objective, and the capability of making a choice. There exists an economic problem, subject to study by economic science, when a decision (choice) is made by one or more players to attain the best possible outcome. [75] Keynesian economics John Maynard Keynes was a key theorist in economics. Keynesian economics derives from John Maynard Keynes , in particular his book The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (1936), which ushered in contemporary macroeconomics as a distinct field. [76] The book focused on determinants of national income in the short run when prices are relatively inflexible. Keynes attempted to explain in broad theoretical detail why high labour-market unemployment might not be self-correcting due to low " effective demand " and why even price flexibility and monetary policy might be unavailing. The term "revolutionary" has been applied to the book in its impact on economic analysis. [77] During the following decades, many economists followed Keynes' ideas and expanded on his works. John Hicks and Alvin Hansen developed the IS–LM model which was a simple formalisation of some of Keynes' insights on the economy's short-run equilibrium. Franco Modigliani and James Tobin developed important theories of private consumption and investment , respectively, two major components of aggregate demand . Lawrence Klein built the first large-scale macroeconometric model , applying the Keynesian thinking systematically to the US economy . [78] Post-WWII economics Immediately after World War II, Keynesian was the dominant economic view of the United States establishment and its allies, Marxian economics was the dominant economic view of the Soviet Union nomenklatura and its allies. Monetarism Main article: Monetarism Monetarism appeared in the 1950s and 1960s, its intellectual leader being Milton Friedman . Monetarists contended that monetary policy and other monetary shocks, as represented by the growth in the money stock, was an important cause of economic fluctuations, and consequently that monetary policy was more important than fiscal policy for purposes of stabilization . [79] [80] Friedman was also skeptical about the ability of central banks to conduct a sensible active monetary policy in practice, advocating instead using simple rules such as a steady rate of money growth. [81] Monetarism rose to prominence in the 1970s and 1980s, when several major central banks followed a monetarist-inspired policy, but was later abandoned again because the results turned out to be unsatisfactory. [82] [83] New classical economics Main article: New classical macroeconomics A more fundamental challenge to the prevailing Keynesian paradigm came in the 1970s from new classical economists like Robert Lucas , Thomas Sargent and Edward Prescott . They introduced the notion of rational expectations in economics, which had profound implications for many economic discussions, among which were the socalled Lucas critique and the presentation of real business cycle models . [84] New Keynesians Main article: New Keynesian economics During the 1980s a group of researchers appeared being called New Keynesian economists , including among others George Akerlof , Janet Yellen , Gregory Mankiw and Olivier Blanchard . They adopted the principle of rational expectations and other monetarist or new classical ideas such as building upon models employing micro foundations and optimizing behaviour, but simultaneously emphasized the importance of various market failures for the functioning of the economy, as had Keynes. [85] Not least, they proposed various reasons that potentially explained the empirically observed features of price and wage rigidity , usually made to be endogenous features of the models, rather than simply assumed as in older Keynesian-style ones. New neoclassical synthesis Main article: New neoclassical synthesis After decades of often heated discussions between Keynesians, monetarists, new classical and new Keynesian economists, a synthesis emerged by the 2000s, often given the name the new neoclassical synthesis . It integrated the rational expectations and optimizing framework of the new classical theory with a new Keynesian role for nominal rigidities and other market imperfections like imperfect information in goods, labour and credit markets. The monetarist importance of monetary policy in stabilizing [86] the economy and in particular controlling inflation was recognized as well as the traditional Keynesian insistence that fiscal policy could also play an influential role in affecting aggregate demand . Methodologically, the synthesis led to a new class of applied models, known as dynamic stochastic general equilibrium or DSGE models, descending from real business cycles models, but extended with several new Keynesian and other features. These models proved very useful and influential in the design of modern monetary policy and are now standard workhorses in most central banks. [87] After the financial crisis After the 2007–2008 financial crisis , macroeconomic research has put greater emphasis on understanding and integrating the financial system into models of the general economy and shedding light on the ways in which problems in the financial sector can turn into major macroeconomic recessions. In this and other research branches, inspiration from behavioral economics has started playing a more important role in mainstream economic theory. [88] Also, heterogeneity among the economic agents, e.g. differences in income, plays an increasing role in recent economic research. [89] Other schools and approaches Main article: Schools of economic thought Other schools or trends of thought referring to a particular style of economics practised at and disseminated from well-defined groups of academicians that have become known worldwide, include the Freiburg School , the School of Lausanne , the Stockholm school and the Chicago school of economics . During the 1970s and 1980s mainstream economics was sometimes separated into the Saltwater approach of those universities along the Eastern and Western coasts of the US, and the Freshwater, or Chicago school approach. [90] Within macroeconomics there is, in general order of their historical appearance in the literature; classical economics , neoclassical economics , Keynesian economics , the neoclassical synthesis , monetarism , new classical economics , New Keynesian economics [91] and the new neoclassical synthesis . [92] Beside the mainstream development of economic thought, various alternative or heterodox economic theories have evolved over time, positioning themselves in contrast to mainstream theory. [93] These include: [93] Austrian School , emphasizing human action , property rights and the freedom to contract and transact to have a thriving and successful economy. [94] It also emphasizes that the state should play as small role as possible (if any role) in the regulation of economic activity between two transacting parties. [95] Friedrich Hayek and Ludwig von Mises are the two most prominent representatives of the Austrian school. Post-Keynesian economics concentrates on macroeconomic rigidities and adjustment processes. It is generally associated with the University of Cambridge and the work of Joan Robinson . [96] Ecological economics like environmental economics studies the interactions between human economies and the ecosystems in which they are embedded, [97] but in contrast to environmental economics takes an oppositional position towards general mainstream economic principles. A major difference between the two subdisciplines is their assumptions about the substitution possibilities between man-made and natural capital . [98] Additionally, alternative developments include Marxian economics , constitutional economics , institutional economics , evolutionary economics , dependency theory , structuralist economics , world systems theory , econophysics , econodynamics , feminist economics and biophysical economics . [99] Feminist economics emphasizes the role that gender plays in economies, challenging analyses that render gender invisible or support gender-oppressive economic systems. [100] The goal is to create economic research and policy analysis that is inclusive and gender-aware to encourage gender equality and improve the well-being of marginalized groups. Methodology Main articles: Microeconomics , Macroeconomics , and Mathematical economics "Economic theory" redirects here. For the publication, see Economic Theory (journal) . Mainstream economic theory relies upon analytical economic models . When creating theories, the objective is to find assumptions which are at least as simple in information requirements, more precise in predictions, and more fruitful in generating additional research than prior theories. [101] While neoclassical economic theory constitutes both the dominant or orthodox theoretical as well as methodological framework , economic theory can also take the form of other schools of thought such as in heterodox economic theories . In microeconomics , principal concepts include supply and demand , marginalism , rational choice theory , opportunity cost , budget constraints , utility , and the theory of the firm . [102] Early macroeconomic models focused on modelling the relationships between aggregate variables, but as the relationships appeared to change over time macroeconomists, including new Keynesians , reformulated their models with microfoundations , [103] in which microeconomic concepts play a major part. Sometimes an economic hypothesis is only qualitative , not quantitative. [104] Expositions of economic reasoning often use two-dimensional graphs to illustrate theoretical relationships. At a higher level of generality, mathematical economics is the application of mathematical methods to represent theories and analyze problems in economics. Paul Samuelson 's treatise Foundations of Economic Analysis (1947) exemplifies the method, particularly as to maximizing behavioral relations of agents reaching equilibrium. The book focused on examining the class of statements called operationally meaningful theorems in economics, which are theorems that can conceivably be refuted by empirical data. [105] Empirical research Main articles: Econometrics and Experimental economics Economic theories are frequently tested empirically , largely through the use of econometrics using economic data . [106] The controlled experiments common to the physical sciences are difficult and uncommon in economics, [107] and instead broad data is observationally studied ; this type of testing is typically regarded as less rigorous than controlled experimentation, and the conclusions typically more tentative. However, the field of experimental economics is growing, and increasing use is being made of natural experiments . Statistical methods such as regression analysis are common. Practitioners use such methods to estimate the size, economic significance, and statistical significance ("signal strength") of the hypothesized relation(s) and to adjust for noise from other variables. By such means, a hypothesis may gain acceptance, although in a probabilistic, rather than certain, sense. Acceptance is dependent upon the falsifiable hypothesis surviving tests. Use of commonly accepted methods need not produce a final conclusion or even a consensus on a particular question, given different tests, data sets , and prior beliefs. Experimental economics has promoted the use of scientifically controlled experiments . This has reduced the long-noted distinction of economics from natural sciences because it allows direct tests of what were previously taken as axioms. [108] In some cases these have found that the axioms are not entirely correct. In behavioural economics , psychologist Daniel Kahneman won the Nobel Prize in economics in 2002 for his and Amos Tversky 's empirical discovery of several cognitive biases and heuristics . Similar empirical testing occurs in neuroeconomics . Another example is the assumption of narrowly selfish preferences versus a model that tests for selfish, altruistic, and cooperative preferences. [109] These techniques have led some to argue that economics is a "genuine science". [110] Microeconomics Main articles: Microeconomics and Market (economics) Economists study trade, production and consumption decisions, such as those that occur in a traditional marketplace . Electronic trading brings together buyers and sellers through an electronic trading platform and network to create virtual market places. Pictured: São Paulo Stock Exchange , Brazil. Microeconomics examines how entities, forming a market structure , interact within a market to create a market system . These entities include private and public players with various classifications, typically operating under scarcity of tradable units and regulation . The item traded may be a tangible product such as apples or a service such as repair services, legal counsel, or entertainment. Various market structures exist. In perfectly competitive markets , no participants are large enough to have the market power to set the price of a homogeneous product. In other words, every participant is a "price taker" as no participant influences the price of a product. In the real world, markets often experience imperfect competition . Forms of imperfect competition include monopoly (in which there is only one seller of a good), duopoly (in which there are only two sellers of a good), oligopoly (in which there are few sellers of a good), monopolistic competition (in which there are many sellers producing highly differentiated goods), monopsony (in which there is only one buyer of a good), and oligopsony (in which there are few buyers of a good). Firms under imperfect competition have the potential to be "price makers", which means that they can influence the prices of their products. In partial equilibrium method of analysis, it is assumed that activity in the market being analysed does not affect other markets. This method aggregates (the sum of all activity) in only one market. General-equilibrium theory studies various markets and their behaviour. It aggregates (the sum of all activity) across all markets. This method studies both changes in markets and their interactions leading towards equilibrium. [111] Production, cost, and efficiency Main articles: Production (economics) , Opportunity cost , Economic efficiency , and Production–possibility frontier In microeconomics, production is the conversion of inputs into outputs . It is an economic process that uses inputs to create a commodity or a service for exchange or direct use. Production is a flow and thus a rate of output per period of time. Distinctions include such production alternatives as for consumption (food, haircuts, etc.) vs. investment goods (new tractors, buildings, roads, etc.), public goods (national defence, smallpox vaccinations, etc.) or private goods (new computers, bananas, etc.), and "guns" vs "butter" . Inputs used in the production process include such primary factors of production as labour services , capital (durable produced goods used in production, such as an existing factory), and land (including natural resources). Other inputs may include intermediate goods used in production of final goods, such as the steel in a new car. Economic efficiency measures how well a system generates desired output with a given set of inputs and available technology . Efficiency is improved if more output is generated without changing inputs. A widely accepted general standard is Pareto efficiency , which is reached when no further change can make someone better off without making someone else worse off. An example production–possibility frontier with illustrative points marked The production–possibility frontier (PPF) is an expository figure for representing scarcity, cost, and efficiency. In the simplest case an economy can produce just two goods (say "guns" and "butter"). The PPF is a table or graph (as at the right) showing the different quantity combinations of the two goods producible with a given technology and total factor inputs, which limit feasible total output. Each point on the curve shows potential total output for the economy, which is the maximum feasible output of one good, given a feasible output quantity of the other good. Scarcity is represented in the figure by people being willing but unable in the aggregate to consume beyond the PPF (such as at X) and by the negative slope of the curve. [112] If production of one good increases along the curve, production of the other good decreases, an inverse relationship . This is because increasing output of one good requires transferring inputs to it from production of the other good, decreasing the latter. The slope of the curve at a point on it gives the trade-off between the two goods. It measures what an additional unit of one good costs in units forgone of the other good, an example of a real opportunity cost. Thus, if one more Gun costs 100 units of butter, the opportunity cost of one Gun is 100 Butter. Along the PPF, scarcity implies that choosing more of one good in the aggregate entails doing with less of the other good. Still, in a market economy , movement along the curve may indicate that the choice of the increased output is anticipated to be worth the cost to the agents. By construction, each point on the curve shows productive efficiency in maximizing output for given total inputs. A point inside the curve (as at A), is feasible but represents production inefficiency (wasteful use of inputs), in that output of one or both goods could increase by moving in a northeast direction to a point on the curve. Examples cited of such inefficiency include high unemployment during a business-cycle recession or economic organization of a country that discourages full use of resources. Being on the curve might still not fully satisfy allocative efficiency (also called Pareto efficiency ) if it does not produce a mix of goods that consumers prefer over other points. Much applied economics in public policy is concerned with determining how the efficiency of an economy can be improved. Recognizing the reality of scarcity and then figuring out how to organize society for the most efficient use of resources has been described as the "essence of economics", where the subject "makes its unique contribution." [113] Specialization A map showing the main trade routes for goods within late medieval Europe Specialization is considered key to economic efficiency based on theoretical and empirical considerations. Different individuals or nations may have different real opportunity costs of production, say from differences in stocks of human capital per worker or capital / labour ratios. According to theory, this may give a comparative advantage in production of goods that make more intensive use of the relatively more abundant, thus relatively cheaper, input. Even if one region has an absolute advantage as to the ratio of its outputs to inputs in every type of output, it may still specialize in the output in which it has a comparative advantage and thereby gain from trading with a region that lacks any absolute advantage but has a comparative advantage in producing something else. It has been observed that a high volume of trade occurs among regions even with access to a similar technology and mix of factor inputs, including high-income countries. This has led to investigation of economies of scale and agglomeration to explain specialization in similar but differentiated product lines, to the overall benefit of respective trading parties or regions. [114] [115] The general theory of specialization applies to trade among individuals, farms, manufacturers, service providers, and economies . Among each of these production systems, there may be a corresponding division of labour with different work groups specializing, or correspondingly different types of capital equipment and differentiated land uses. [116] An example that combines features above is a country that specializes in the production of high-tech knowledge products, as developed countries do, and trades with developing nations for goods produced in factories where labour is relatively cheap and plentiful, resulting in different in opportunity costs of production. More total output and utility thereby results from specializing in production and trading than if each country produced its own high-tech and low-tech products. Theory and observation set out the conditions such that market prices of outputs and productive inputs select an allocation of factor inputs by comparative advantage, so that (relatively) low-cost inputs go to producing low-cost outputs. In the process, aggregate output may increase as a by-product or by design . [117] Such specialization of production creates opportunities for gains from trade whereby resource owners benefit from trade in the sale of one type of output for other, more highly valued goods. A measure of gains from trade is the increased income levels that trade may facilitate. [118] Supply and demand Main article: Supply and demand The supply and demand model describes how prices vary as a result of a balance between product availability and demand. The graph depicts an increase (that is, right-shift) in demand from D1 to D2 along with the consequent increase in price and quantity required to reach a new equilibrium point on the supply curve (S). Prices and quantities have been described as the most directly observable attributes of goods produced and exchanged in a market economy . [119] The theory of supply and demand is an organizing principle for explaining how prices coordinate the amounts produced and consumed. In microeconomics , it applies to price and output determination for a market with perfect competition , which includes the condition of no buyers or sellers large enough to have price-setting power . For a given market of a commodity , demand is the relation of the quantity that all buyers would be prepared to purchase at each unit price of the good. Demand is often represented by a table or a graph showing price and quantity demanded (as in the figure). Demand theory describes individual consumers as rationally choosing the most preferred quantity of each good, given income, prices, tastes, etc. A term for this is "constrained utility maximization" (with income and wealth as the constraints on demand). Here, utility refers to the hypothesized relation of each individual consumer for ranking different commodity bundles as more or less preferred. The law of demand states that, in general, price and quantity demanded in a given market are inversely related. That is, the higher the price of a product, the less of it people would be prepared to buy (other things unchanged ). As the price of a commodity falls, consumers move toward it from relatively more expensive goods (the substitution effect ). In addition, purchasing power from the price decline increases ability to buy (the income effect ). Other factors can change demand; for example an increase in income will shift the demand curve for a normal good outward relative to the origin, as in the figure. All determinants are predominantly taken as constant factors of demand and supply. Supply is the relation between the price of a good and the quantity available for sale at that price. It may be represented as a table or graph relating price and quantity supplied. Producers, for example business firms, are hypothesized to be profit maximizers, meaning that they attempt to produce and supply the amount of goods that will bring them the highest profit. Supply is typically represented as a function relating price and quantity, if other factors are unchanged. That is, the higher the price at which the good can be sold, the more of it producers will supply, as in the figure. The higher price makes it profitable to increase production. Just as on the demand side, the position of the supply can shift, say from a change in the price of a productive input or a technical improvement. The "Law of Supply" states that, in general, a rise in price leads to an expansion in supply and a fall in price leads to a contraction in supply. Here as well, the determinants of supply, such as price of substitutes, cost of production, technology applied and various factors inputs of production are all taken to be constant for a specific time period of evaluation of supply. Market equilibrium occurs where quantity supplied equals quantity demanded, the intersection of the supply and demand curves in the figure above. At a price below equilibrium, there is a shortage of quantity supplied compared to quantity demanded. This is posited to bid the price up. At a price above equilibrium, there is a surplus of quantity supplied compared to quantity demanded. This pushes the price down. The model of supply and demand predicts that for given supply and demand curves, price and quantity will stabilize at the price that makes quantity supplied equal to quantity demanded. Similarly, demand-and-supply theory predicts a new price-quantity combination from a shift in demand (as to the figure), or in supply. Firms Main articles: Theory of the firm , Industrial organization , Business economics , and Managerial economics People frequently do not trade directly on markets. Instead, on the supply side, they may work in and produce through firms. The most obvious kinds of firms are corporations , partnerships and trusts . According to Ronald Coase , people begin to organize their production in firms when the costs of doing business becomes lower than doing it on the market. [120] Firms combine labour and capital, and can achieve far greater economies of scale (when the average cost per unit declines as more units are produced) than individual market trading. In perfectly competitive markets studied in the theory of supply and demand, there are many producers, none of which significantly influence price. Industrial organization generalizes from that special case to study the strategic behaviour of firms that do have significant control of price. It considers the structure of such markets and their interactions. Common market structures studied besides perfect competition include monopolistic competition, various forms of oligopoly, and monopoly. [121] Managerial economics applies microeconomic analysis to specific decisions in business firms or other management units. It draws heavily from quantitative methods such as operations research and programming and from statistical methods such as regression analysis in the absence of certainty and perfect knowledge. A unifying theme is the attempt to optimize business decisions, including unit-cost minimization and profit maximization, given the firm's objectives and constraints imposed by technology and market conditions. [122] Uncertainty and game theory Main articles: Information economics , Game theory , and Financial economics Uncertainty in economics is an unknown prospect of gain or loss, whether quantifiable as risk or not. Without it, household behaviour would be unaffected by uncertain employment and income prospects, financial and capital markets would reduce to exchange of a single instrument in each market period, and there would be no communications industry. [123] Given its different forms, there are various ways of representing uncertainty and modelling economic agents' responses to it. [124] Game theory is a branch of applied mathematics that considers strategic interactions between agents, one kind of uncertainty. It provides a mathematical foundation of industrial organization , discussed above, to model different types of firm behaviour, for example in a solipsistic industry (few sellers), but equally applicable to wage negotiations, bargaining , contract design , and any situation where individual agents are few enough to have perceptible effects on each other. In behavioural economics , it has been used to model the strategies agents choose when interacting with others whose interests are at least partially adverse to their own. [125] In this, it generalizes maximization approaches developed to analyse market actors such as in the supply and demand model and allows for incomplete information of actors. The field dates from the 1944 classic Theory of Games and Economic Behavior by John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern . It has significant applications seemingly outside of economics in such diverse subjects as the formulation of nuclear strategies , ethics , political science , and evolutionary biology . [126] Risk aversion may stimulate activity that in well-functioning markets smooths out risk and communicates information about risk, as in markets for insurance , commodity futures contracts , and financial instruments . Financial economics or simply finance describes the allocation of financial resources. It also analyses the pricing of financial instruments, the financial structure of companies, the efficiency and fragility of financial markets , [127] financial crises , and related government policy or regulation . [128] [129] [130] [131] [132] Some market organizations may give rise to inefficiencies associated with uncertainty. Based on George Akerlof 's " Market for Lemons " article, the paradigm example is of a dodgy second-hand car market. Customers without knowledge of whether a car is a "lemon" depress its price below what a quality second-hand car would be. [133] Information asymmetry arises here, if the seller has more relevant information than the buyer but no incentive to disclose it. Related problems in insurance are adverse selection , such that those at most risk are most likely to insure (say reckless drivers), and moral hazard , such that insurance results in riskier behaviour (say more reckless driving). [134] Both problems may raise insurance costs and reduce efficiency by driving otherwise willing transactors from the market (" incomplete markets "). Moreover, attempting to reduce one problem, say adverse selection by mandating insurance, may add to another, say moral hazard. Information economics , which studies such problems, has relevance in subjects such as insurance, contract law , mechanism design , monetary economics , and health care . [134] Applied subjects include market and legal remedies to spread or reduce risk, such as warranties, government-mandated partial insurance, restructuring or bankruptcy law , inspection, and regulation for quality and information disclosure. [135] [136] [137] [138] [139] Market failure
Toggle the table of contents Political science From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific study of politics This article is about the field of study. For other uses, see Political Science (disambiguation) . "Poli sci" redirects here. For other uses, see Poli sci (disambiguation) . e Political science is the scientific study of politics . It is a social science dealing with systems of governance and power, and the analysis of political activities, political thought, political behavior , and associated constitutions and laws . [1] Origin[ edit ] Political science is a social science dealing with systems of governance and power, and the analysis of political activities, political institutions, political thought and behavior, and associated constitutions and laws . [3] As a social science, contemporary political science started to take shape in the latter half of the 19th century and began to separate itself from political philosophy and history. [4] Into the late 19th century, it was still uncommon for political science to be considered a distinct field from history. [4] The term "political science" was not always distinguished from political philosophy, and the modern discipline has a clear set of antecedents including moral philosophy, political economy, political theology , history, and other fields concerned with normative determinations of what ought to be and with deducing the characteristics and functions of the ideal state. Generally, classical political philosophy is primarily defined by a concern for Hellenic and Enlightenment thought, [5] political scientists are also marked by a great concern for " modernity " and the contemporary nation state , along with the study of classical thought, and as such share more terminology with sociologists (e.g., structure and agency ). [6] The advent of political science as a university discipline was marked by the creation of university departments and chairs with the title of political science arising in the late 19th century. The designation "political scientist" is commonly used to denote someone with a doctorate or master's degree in the field. [7] Integrating political studies of the past into a unified discipline is ongoing, and the history of political science has provided a rich field for the growth of both normative and positive political science, with each part of the discipline sharing some historical predecessors. The American Political Science Association and the American Political Science Review were founded in 1903 and 1906, respectively, in an effort to distinguish the study of politics from economics and other social phenomena. APSA membership rose from 204 in 1904 to 1,462 in 1915. [4] APSA members played a key role in setting up political science departments that were distinct from history, philosophy, law, sociology, and economics. [4] A world map distinguishing countries of the world as federations (green) from unitary states (blue), a work of political science The journal Political Science Quarterly was established in 1886 by the Academy of Political Science. In the inaugural issue of Political Science Quarterly, Munroe Smith defined political science as "the science of the state. Taken in this sense, it includes the organization and functions of the state, and the relation of states one to another." [8] As part of a UNESCO initiative to promote political science in the late 1940s, the International Political Science Association was founded in 1949, as well as national associations in France in 1949, Britain in 1950, and West Germany in 1951. [4] Behavioral revolution and new institutionalism[ edit ] In the 1950s and the 1960s, a behavioral revolution stressing the systematic and rigorously scientific study of individual and group behavior swept the discipline. A focus on studying political behavior, rather than institutions or interpretation of legal texts, characterized early behavioral political science, including work by Robert Dahl , Philip Converse , and in the collaboration between sociologist Paul Lazarsfeld and public opinion scholar Bernard Berelson . The late 1960s and early 1970s witnessed a takeoff in the use of deductive, game-theoretic formal modelling techniques aimed at generating a more analytical corpus of knowledge in the discipline. This period saw a surge of research that borrowed theory and methods from economics to study political institutions, such as the United States Congress, as well as political behavior, such as voting. William H. Riker and his colleagues and students at the University of Rochester were the main proponents of this shift. Despite considerable research progress in the discipline based on all types of scholarship discussed above, scholars have noted that progress toward systematic theory has been modest and uneven. [9] 21st century[ edit ] In 2000, the Perestroika Movement in political science was introduced as a reaction against what supporters of the movement called the mathematicization of political science. Those who identified with the movement argued for a plurality of methodologies and approaches in political science and for more relevance of the discipline to those outside of it. [10] Some evolutionary psychology theories argue that humans have evolved a highly developed set of psychological mechanisms for dealing with politics. However, these mechanisms evolved for dealing with the small group politics that characterized the ancestral environment and not the much larger political structures in today's world. This is argued to explain many important features and systematic cognitive biases of current politics. [11] Main sub-disciplines of political science, from top left to right: 1. Domestic politics and government ; 2. Comparative politics ; 3. International relations ; 4. Political theory ; 5. Political economy ; 6. Political methodology ; 7. Public administration ; 8. Public policy Political science is a social study concerning the allocation and transfer of power in decision making , the roles and systems of governance including governments and international organizations , political behaviour, and public policies . It measures the success of governance and specific policies by examining many factors, including stability , justice , material wealth , peace , and public health . Some political scientists seek to advance positive theses (which attempt to describe how things are, as opposed to how they should be) by analysing politics; others advance normative theses, such as by making specific policy recommendations. The study of politics and policies can be closely connected—for example, in comparative analyses of which types of political institutions tend to produce certain types of policies. [12] Political science provides analysis and predictions about political and governmental issues. [13] Political scientists examine the processes, systems and political dynamics of countries and regions of the world, often to raise public awareness or to influence specific governments. [13] Political scientists may provide the frameworks from which journalists, special interest groups, politicians, and the electorate analyze issues. According to Chaturvedy, Political scientists may serve as advisers to specific politicians, or even run for office as politicians themselves. Political scientists can be found working in governments, in political parties, or as civil servants. They may be involved with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or political movements. In a variety of capacities, people educated and trained in political science can add value and expertise to corporations . Private enterprises such as think tanks , research institutes, polling and public relations firms often employ political scientists. [14] Political scientists may study political phenomena within one specific country. For example, they may study just the politics of the United States [15] or just the politics of China . [16] Political scientists look at a variety of data, including constitutions, elections , public opinion , and public policy , foreign policy , legislatures, and judiciaries. Political scientists will often focus on the politics of their own country; for example, a political scientist from Indonesia may become an expert in the politics of Indonesia. [17] Anticipating crises[ edit ] The theory of political transitions, [18] and the methods of analyzing and anticipating [19] crises, [20] form an important part of political science. Several general indicators of crises and methods were proposed for anticipating critical transitions. [21] Among them, one statistical indicator of crisis, a simultaneous increase of variance and correlations in large groups, was proposed for crisis anticipation and may be successfully used in various areas. [22] Its applicability for early diagnosis of political crises was demonstrated by the analysis of the prolonged stress period preceding the 2014 Ukrainian economic and political crisis. There was a simultaneous increase in the total correlation between the 19 major public fears in the Ukrainian society (by about 64%) and in their statistical dispersion (by 29%) during the pre-crisis years. [23] A feature shared by certain major revolutions is that they were not predicted. The theory of apparent inevitability of crises and revolutions was also developed. [24] The study of major crises, both political crises and external crises that can affect politics, is not limited to attempts to predict regime transitions or major changes in political institutions. Political scientists also study how governments handle unexpected disasters, and how voters in democracies react to their governments' preparations for and responses to crises. [25] Main article: Political methodology Political science is methodologically diverse and appropriates many methods originating in psychology, social research , political philosophy, and many others, in addition to those that developed chiefly within the field of political science. Political scientists approach the study of politics from a host of different ontological orientations and with a variety of different tools. Because political science is essentially a study of human behavior , in all aspects of politics , observations in controlled environments are often challenging to reproduce or duplicate, though experimental methods are increasingly common (see experimental political science ). [26] Citing this difficulty, former American Political Science Association President Lawrence Lowell once said "We are limited by the impossibility of experiment. Politics is an observational, not an experimental science." [19] Because of this, political scientists have historically observed political elites, institutions, and individual or group behaviour in order to identify patterns, draw generalizations, and build theories of politics. Like all social sciences, political science faces the difficulty of observing human actors that can only be partially observed and who have the capacity for making conscious choices, unlike other subjects, such as non-human organisms in biology , minerals in geoscience , chemical elements in chemistry , stars in astronomy , or particles in physics . Despite the complexities, contemporary political science has progressed by adopting a variety of methods and theoretical approaches to understanding politics, and methodological pluralism is a defining feature of contemporary political science. Empirical political science methods include the use of field experiments, [27] surveys and survey experiments, [28] case studies, [29] process tracing, [30] [31] historical and institutional analysis, [32] ethnography, [33] participant observation, [34] and interview research. [35] Political scientists also use and develop theoretical tools like game theory and agent-based models to study a host of political systems and situations. [36] Political theorists approach theories of political phenomena with a similar diversity of positions and tools, including feminist political theory , historical analysis associated with the Cambridge school , and Straussian approaches . Political science may overlap with topics of study that are the traditional focuses of other social sciences—for example, when sociological norms or psychological biases are connected to political phenomena. In these cases, political science may either inherit their methods of study or develop a contrasting approach. [37] For example, Lisa Wedeen has argued that political science's approach to the idea of culture, originating with Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba and exemplified by authors like Samuel P. Huntington , could benefit from aligning more closely with the study of culture in anthropology. [37] In turn, methodologies that are developed within political science may influence how researchers in other fields, like public health, conceive of and approach political processes and policies. [38] Further information: Public policy school and College of Arts and Sciences Political science, possibly like the social sciences as a whole, can be described "as a discipline which lives on the fault line between the 'two cultures' in the academy, the sciences and the humanities ." [39] Thus, in most American colleges, especially liberal arts colleges it would be located within the school or college of arts and sciences , if no separate college of arts and sciences exists or if the college or university prefers that it be in a separate constituent college or academic department, then political science may be a separate department housed as part of a division or school of humanities or liberal arts . [40] At some universities, especially research universities and in particular those that have a strong cooperation between research, undergraduate, and graduate faculty with a stronger more applied emphasis in public administration, political science would be taught by the university's public policy school . Most United States colleges and universities offer BA programs in political science. MA or MAT and PhD or EdD programs are common at larger universities. The term political science is more popular in post-1960s North America than elsewhere while universities predating the 1960s or those historically influenced by them would call the field of study government; [41] other institutions, especially those outside the United States, see political science as part of a broader discipline of political studies or politics in general. While political science implies the use of the scientific method , political studies implies a broader approach, although the naming of degree courses does not necessarily reflect their content. Separate, specialized or, in some cases, professional degree programs in international relations , public policy , and public administration are common at both the undergraduate and postgraduate levels, although most but not all undergraduate level education in these sub-fields of political science is generally found in academic concentrations within a political science academic major . Master's-level programs in public administration are professional degrees covering public policy along with other applied subjects; they are often seen as more linked to politics than any other discipline, which may be reflected by being housed in that department. [42] The main national honor society for college and university students of government and politics in the United States is Pi Sigma Alpha , while Pi Alpha Alpha is a national honor society specifically designated for public administration . Writing[ edit ] The most common piece of academic writing in generalist political sciences is the research paper, which investigates an original research question . [43] [44]
Toggle the table of contents Sociology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social science that studies human society and its development For the journal, see Sociology (journal) . Part of a series on e Sociology is the study of human society that focuses on society , human social behavior , patterns of social relationships , social interaction , and aspects of culture associated with everyday life. [1] [2] [3] Regarded as a part of both the social sciences and humanities , sociology uses various methods of empirical investigation and critical analysis [4] : 3–5 to develop a body of knowledge about social order and social change . [4] : 32–40 Sociological subject matter ranges from micro-level analyses of individual interaction and agency to macro-level analyses of social systems and social structure . Applied sociological research may be applied directly to social policy and welfare, whereas theoretical approaches may focus on the understanding of social processes and phenomenological method. [5] Traditional focuses of sociology include social stratification , social class , social mobility , religion , secularization , law , sexuality , gender , and deviance . Recent studies have added socio-technical aspects of the digital divide as a new focus. [6] As all spheres of human activity are affected by the interplay between social structure and individual agency , sociology has gradually expanded its focus to other subjects and institutions, such as health and the institution of medicine ; economy ; military ; punishment and systems of control ; the Internet ; sociology of education ; social capital ; and the role of social activity in the development of scientific knowledge . The range of social scientific methods has also expanded, as social researchers draw upon a variety of qualitative and quantitative techniques. The linguistic and cultural turns of the mid-20th century, especially, have led to increasingly interpretative , hermeneutic , and philosophical approaches towards the analysis of society. Conversely, the turn of the 21st century has seen the rise of new analytically , mathematically , and computationally rigorous techniques, such as agent-based modelling and social network analysis. [7] [8] Social research has influence throughout various industries and sectors of life, such as among politicians, policy makers , and legislators; educators ; planners ; administrators ; developers ; business magnates and managers; social workers; non-governmental organizations; and non-profit organizations, as well as individuals interested in resolving social issues in general. Ibn Khaldun statue in Tunis , Tunisia (1332–1406) Sociological reasoning predates the foundation of the discipline itself. Social analysis has origins in the common stock of universal, global knowledge and philosophy, having been carried out from as far back as the time of old comic poetry which features social and political criticism, [9] and ancient Greek philosophers Socrates , Plato , and Aristotle . For instance, the origin of the survey can be traced back to at least the Domesday Book in 1086, [10] [11] while ancient philosophers such as Confucius wrote about the importance of social roles.[ citation needed ] Medieval Arabic writings encompass a rich tradition that unveils early insights into the field of sociology. Some sources consider Ibn Khaldun , a 14th-century Muslim scholar from Tunisia , [note 1] to have been the father of sociology, although there is no reference to his work in the writings of European contributors to modern sociology. [12] [13] [14] [15] Khaldun's Muqaddimah was considered to be amongst the first work to advance social-scientific reasoning on social cohesion and social conflict . [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] Etymology[ edit ] The word sociology derives part of its name from the Latin word socius ('companion' or 'fellowship' [22] ). The suffix -logy ('the study of') comes from that of the Greek -λογία , derived from λόγος (lógos, 'word' or 'knowledge').[ citation needed ] The term sociology was first coined in 1780 by the French essayist Emmanuel-Joseph Sieyès in an unpublished manuscript . [23] [note 2] Sociology was later defined independently by French philosopher of science Auguste Comte (1798–1857) in 1838 [24] as a new way of looking at society. [25] : 10 Comte had earlier used the term social physics, but it had been subsequently appropriated by others, most notably the Belgian statistician Adolphe Quetelet . Comte endeavored to unify history, psychology, and economics through the scientific understanding of social life. Writing shortly after the malaise of the French Revolution , he proposed that social ills could be remedied through sociological positivism , an epistemological approach outlined in the Course in Positive Philosophy (1830–1842), later included in A General View of Positivism (1848). Comte believed a positivist stage would mark the final era in the progression of human understanding, after conjectural theological and metaphysical phases. [26] In observing the circular dependence of theory and observation in science, and having classified the sciences, Comte may be regarded as the first philosopher of science in the modern sense of the term. [27] [28] Auguste Comte (1798–1857) Comte gave a powerful impetus to the development of sociology, an impetus that bore fruit in the later decades of the nineteenth century. To say this is certainly not to claim that French sociologists such as Durkheim were devoted disciples of the high priest of positivism. But by insisting on the irreducibility of each of his basic sciences to the particular science of sciences which it presupposed in the hierarchy and by emphasizing the nature of sociology as the scientific study of social phenomena Comte put sociology on the map. To be sure, [its] beginnings can be traced back well beyond Montesquieu , for example, and to Condorcet , not to speak of Saint-Simon , Comte's immediate predecessor. But Comte's clear recognition of sociology as a particular science, with a character of its own, justified Durkheim in regarding him as the father or founder of this science, even though Durkheim did not accept the idea of the three states and criticized Comte's approach to sociology. Frederick Copleston , A History of Philosophy: IX Modern Philosophy (1974), p. 118 Marx[ edit ] Both Comte and Karl Marx set out to develop scientifically justified systems in the wake of European industrialization and secularization , informed by various key movements in the philosophies of history and science . Marx rejected Comtean positivism [29] but in attempting to develop a "science of society" nevertheless came to be recognized as a founder of sociology as the word gained wider meaning. For Isaiah Berlin , even though Marx did not consider himself to be a sociologist, he may be regarded as the "true father" of modern sociology, "in so far as anyone can claim the title." [30] : 130 To have given clear and unified answers in familiar empirical terms to those theoretical questions which most occupied men's minds at the time, and to have deduced from them clear practical directives without creating obviously artificial links between the two, was the principal achievement of Marx's theory. The sociological treatment of historical and moral problems, which Comte and after him, Spencer and Taine , had discussed and mapped, became a precise and concrete study only when the attack of militant Marxism made its conclusions a burning issue, and so made the search for evidence more zealous and the attention to method more intense. [30] : 13–14 Herbert Spencer (1820–1903) Herbert Spencer was one of the most popular and influential 19th-century sociologists. It is estimated that he sold one million books in his lifetime, far more than any other sociologist at the time. [31] So strong was his influence that many other 19th-century thinkers, including Émile Durkheim , defined their ideas in relation to his. Durkheim's Division of Labour in Society is to a large extent an extended debate with Spencer from whose sociology Durkheim borrowed extensively. [32] Also a notable biologist , Spencer coined the term survival of the fittest . While Marxian ideas defined one strand of sociology, Spencer was a critic of socialism, as well as a strong advocate for a laissez-faire style of government. His ideas were closely observed by conservative political circles, especially in the United States and England. [33] Foundations of the academic discipline[ edit ] Émile Durkheim The first formal Department of Sociology in the world was established in 1892 by Albion Small —from the invitation of William Rainey Harper —at the University of Chicago . The American Journal of Sociology was founded shortly thereafter in 1895 by Small as well. [34] The institutionalization of sociology as an academic discipline, however, was chiefly led by Émile Durkheim , who developed positivism as a foundation for practical social research . While Durkheim rejected much of the detail of Comte's philosophy, he retained and refined its method, maintaining that the social sciences are a logical continuation of the natural ones into the realm of human activity, and insisting that they may retain the same objectivity, rationalism, and approach to causality. [35] Durkheim set up the first European department of sociology at the University of Bordeaux in 1895, publishing his Rules of the Sociological Method (1895). [36] For Durkheim, sociology could be described as the "science of institutions, their genesis and their functioning." [37] Durkheim's monograph Suicide (1897) is considered a seminal work in statistical analysis by contemporary sociologists. Suicide is a case study of variations in suicide rates among Catholic and Protestant populations, and served to distinguish sociological analysis from psychology or philosophy. It also marked a major contribution to the theoretical concept of structural functionalism . By carefully examining suicide statistics in different police districts, he attempted to demonstrate that Catholic communities have a lower suicide rate than that of Protestants, something he attributed to social (as opposed to individual or psychological ) causes. He developed the notion of objective social facts to delineate a unique empirical object for the science of sociology to study. [35] Through such studies he posited that sociology would be able to determine whether any given society is healthy or pathological, and seek social reform to negate organic breakdown, or " social anomie ". Sociology quickly evolved as an academic response to the perceived challenges of modernity , such as industrialization, urbanization, secularization , and the process of rationalization . [38] The field predominated in continental Europe , with British anthropology and statistics generally following on a separate trajectory. By the turn of the 20th century, however, many theorists were active in the English-speaking world . Few early sociologists were confined strictly to the subject, interacting also with economics, jurisprudence , psychology and philosophy, with theories being appropriated in a variety of different fields. Since its inception, sociological epistemology, methods, and frames of inquiry, have significantly expanded and diverged. [5] Durkheim, Marx, and the German theorist Max Weber are typically cited as the three principal architects of sociology. [39] Herbert Spencer , William Graham Sumner , Lester F. Ward , W.E.B. Du Bois , Vilfredo Pareto , Alexis de Tocqueville , Werner Sombart , Thorstein Veblen , Ferdinand Tönnies , Georg Simmel , Jane Addams and Karl Mannheim are often included on academic curricula as founding theorists. Curricula also may include Charlotte Perkins Gilman , Marianne Weber , Harriet Martineau , and Friedrich Engels as founders of the feminist tradition in sociology. Each key figure is associated with a particular theoretical perspective and orientation. [40] Marx and Engels associated the emergence of modern society above all with the development of capitalism; for Durkheim it was connected in particular with industrialization and the new social division of labor which this brought about; for Weber it had to do with the emergence of a distinctive way of thinking, the rational calculation which he associated with the Protestant Ethic (more or less what Marx and Engels speak of in terms of those 'icy waves of egotistical calculation'). Together the works of these great classical sociologists suggest what Giddens has recently described as 'a multidimensional view of institutions of modernity' and which emphasises not only capitalism and industrialism as key institutions of modernity, but also 'surveillance' (meaning 'control of information and social supervision') and 'military power' (control of the means of violence in the context of the industrialisation of war). [40] John Harriss , The Second Great Transformation? Capitalism at the End of the Twentieth Century (1992) Bust of Ferdinand Tönnies in Husum , Germany The first college course entitled "Sociology" was taught in the United States at Yale in 1875 by William Graham Sumner . [41] In 1883, Lester F. Ward , who later became the first president of the American Sociological Association (ASA), published Dynamic Sociology—Or Applied social science as based upon statical sociology and the less complex sciences, attacking the laissez-faire sociology of Herbert Spencer and Sumner. [33] Ward's 1,200-page book was used as core material in many early American sociology courses. In 1890, the oldest continuing American course in the modern tradition began at the University of Kansas , lectured by Frank W. Blackmar . [42] The Department of Sociology at the University of Chicago was established in 1892 by Albion Small , who also published the first sociology textbook: An introduction to the study of society. [43] George Herbert Mead and Charles Cooley , who had met at the University of Michigan in 1891 (along with John Dewey ), moved to Chicago in 1894. [44] Their influence gave rise to social psychology and the symbolic interactionism of the modern Chicago School . [45] The American Journal of Sociology was founded in 1895, followed by the ASA in 1905. [43] The sociological canon of classics with Durkheim and Max Weber at the top owes its existence in part to Talcott Parsons , who is largely credited with introducing both to American audiences. [46] Parsons consolidated the sociological tradition and set the agenda for American sociology at the point of its fastest disciplinary growth. Sociology in the United States was less historically influenced by Marxism than its European counterpart, and to this day broadly remains more statistical in its approach. [47] Main article: Positivism The overarching methodological principle of positivism is to conduct sociology in broadly the same manner as natural science . An emphasis on empiricism and the scientific method is sought to provide a tested foundation for sociological research based on the assumption that the only authentic knowledge is scientific knowledge, and that such knowledge can only arrive by positive affirmation through scientific methodology.[ citation needed ] Our main goal is to extend scientific rationalism to human conduct.... What has been called our positivism is but a consequence of this rationalism. [55] Émile Durkheim , The Rules of Sociological Method (1895) The term has long since ceased to carry this meaning; there are no fewer than twelve distinct epistemologies that are referred to as positivism. [35] [56] Many of these approaches do not self-identify as "positivist", some because they themselves arose in opposition to older forms of positivism, and some because the label has over time become a pejorative term [35] by being mistakenly linked with a theoretical empiricism . The extent of antipositivist criticism has also diverged, with many rejecting the scientific method and others only seeking to amend it to reflect 20th-century developments in the philosophy of science. However, positivism (broadly understood as a scientific approach to the study of society) remains dominant in contemporary sociology, especially in the United States. [35] Loïc Wacquant distinguishes three major strains of positivism: Durkheimian , Logical, and Instrumental. [35] None of these are the same as that set forth by Comte, who was unique in advocating such a rigid (and perhaps optimistic) version. [57] [4] : 94–8, 100–4 While Émile Durkheim rejected much of the detail of Comte's philosophy, he retained and refined its method. Durkheim maintained that the social sciences are a logical continuation of the natural ones into the realm of human activity, and insisted that they should retain the same objectivity, rationalism, and approach to causality. [35] He developed the notion of objective sui generis "social facts" to serve as unique empirical objects for the science of sociology to study. [35] The variety of positivism that remains dominant today is termed instrumental positivism. This approach eschews epistemological and metaphysical concerns (such as the nature of social facts) in favour of methodological clarity, replicability , reliability and validity . [58] This positivism is more or less synonymous with quantitative research , and so only resembles older positivism in practice. Since it carries no explicit philosophical commitment, its practitioners may not belong to any particular school of thought. Modern sociology of this type is often credited to Paul Lazarsfeld , [35] who pioneered large-scale survey studies and developed statistical techniques for analysing them. This approach lends itself to what Robert K. Merton called middle-range theory : abstract statements that generalize from segregated hypotheses and empirical regularities rather than starting with an abstract idea of a social whole. [59] Main article: Anti-positivism The German philosopher Hegel criticised traditional empiricist epistemology, which he rejected as uncritical, and determinism, which he viewed as overly mechanistic. [4] : 169 Karl Marx 's methodology borrowed from Hegelian dialecticism but also a rejection of positivism in favour of critical analysis, seeking to supplement the empirical acquisition of "facts" with the elimination of illusions. [4] : 202–3 He maintained that appearances need to be critiqued rather than simply documented. Early hermeneuticians such as Wilhelm Dilthey pioneered the distinction between natural and social science (' Geisteswissenschaft '). Various neo-Kantian philosophers, phenomenologists and human scientists further theorized how the analysis of the social world differs to that of the natural world due to the irreducibly complex aspects of human society, culture, and being . [60] [61] In the Italian context of development of social sciences and of sociology in particular, there are oppositions to the first foundation of the discipline, sustained by speculative philosophy in accordance with the antiscientific tendencies matured by critique of positivism and evolutionism, so a tradition Progressist struggles to establish itself. [62] At the turn of the 20th century, the first generation of German sociologists formally introduced methodological anti-positivism , proposing that research should concentrate on human cultural norms , values , symbols , and social processes viewed from a resolutely subjective perspective. Max Weber argued that sociology may be loosely described as a science as it is able to identify causal relationships of human " social action "—especially among " ideal types ", or hypothetical simplifications of complex social phenomena. [4] : 239–40 As a non-positivist, however, Weber sought relationships that are not as "historical, invariant, or generalisable" [4] : 241 as those pursued by natural scientists. Fellow German sociologist, Ferdinand Tönnies , theorised on two crucial abstract concepts with his work on " gemeinschaft and gesellschaft " ( lit. 'community' and 'society'). Tönnies marked a sharp line between the realm of concepts and the reality of social action: the first must be treated axiomatically and in a deductive way ("pure sociology"), whereas the second empirically and inductively ("applied sociology"). [63] Max Weber [Sociology is] ... the science whose object is to interpret the meaning of social action and thereby give a causal explanation of the way in which the action proceeds and the effects which it produces. By 'action' in this definition is meant the human behaviour when and to the extent that the agent or agents see it as subjectively meaningful ... the meaning to which we refer may be either (a) the meaning actually intended either by an individual agent on a particular historical occasion or by a number of agents on an approximate average in a given set of cases, or (b) the meaning attributed to the agent or agents, as types, in a pure type constructed in the abstract. In neither case is the 'meaning' to be thought of as somehow objectively 'correct' or 'true' by some metaphysical criterion. This is the difference between the empirical sciences of action, such as sociology and history, and any kind of prior discipline, such as jurisprudence, logic, ethics, or aesthetics whose aim is to extract from their subject-matter 'correct' or 'valid' meaning. [64] Max Weber , The Nature of Social Action (1922), p. 7 Both Weber and Georg Simmel pioneered the " Verstehen " (or 'interpretative') method in social science; a systematic process by which an outside observer attempts to relate to a particular cultural group, or indigenous people, on their own terms and from their own point of view. [65] Through the work of Simmel, in particular, sociology acquired a possible character beyond positivist data-collection or grand, deterministic systems of structural law. Relatively isolated from the sociological academy throughout his lifetime, Simmel presented idiosyncratic analyses of modernity more reminiscent of the phenomenological and existential writers than of Comte or Durkheim, paying particular concern to the forms of, and possibilities for, social individuality. [66] His sociology engaged in a neo-Kantian inquiry into the limits of perception, asking 'What is society?' in a direct allusion to Kant's question 'What is nature?' [67] Georg Simmel The deepest problems of modern life flow from the attempt of the individual to maintain the independence and individuality of his existence against the sovereign powers of society, against the weight of the historical heritage and the external culture and technique of life. The antagonism represents the most modern form of the conflict which primitive man must carry on with nature for his bodily existence. The eighteenth century may have called for liberation from all the ties which grew up historically in politics, in religion, in morality, and in economics to permit the original natural virtue of man, which is equal in everyone, to develop without inhibition; the nineteenth century may have sought to promote, in addition to man's freedom, his individuality (which is connected with the division of labor) and his achievements which make him unique and indispensable but which at the same time make him so much the more dependent on the complementary activity of others; Nietzsche may have seen the relentless struggle of the individual as the prerequisite for his full development, while socialism found the same thing in the suppression of all competition – but in each of these the same fundamental motive was at work, namely the resistance of the individual to being leveled, swallowed up in the social-technological mechanism. [68] Classical theory[ edit ] The contemporary discipline of sociology is theoretically multi-paradigmatic [69] in line with the contentions of classical social theory. Randall Collins ' well-cited survey of sociological theory [70] retroactively labels various theorists as belonging to four theoretical traditions: Functionalism, Conflict, Symbolic Interactionism, and Utilitarianism. [71] Accordingly, modern sociological theory predominantly descends from functionalist (Durkheim) and conflict (Marx and Weber) approaches to social structure, as well as from symbolic-interactionist approaches to social interaction, such as micro-level structural ( Simmel ) and pragmatist ( Mead , Cooley ) perspectives. Utilitarianism (also known as rational choice or social exchange), although often associated with economics, is an established tradition within sociological theory. [72] [73] Lastly, as argued by Raewyn Connell , a tradition that is often forgotten is that of Social Darwinism , which applies the logic of Darwinian biological evolution to people and societies. [74] This tradition often aligns with classical functionalism, and was once the dominant theoretical stance in American sociology, from c. 1881 – c. 1915, [75] associated with several founders of sociology, primarily Herbert Spencer , Lester F. Ward , and William Graham Sumner . Contemporary sociological theory retains traces of each of these traditions and they are by no means mutually exclusive.[ citation needed ] Main article: Structural functionalism A broad historical paradigm in both sociology and anthropology , functionalism addresses the social structure —referred to as " social organization " by the classical theorists—with respect to the whole as well as the necessary function of the whole's constituent elements. A common analogy (popularized by Herbert Spencer ) is to regard norms and institutions as 'organs' that work towards the proper functioning of the entire 'body' of society. [76] The perspective was implicit in the original sociological positivism of Comte but was theorized in full by Durkheim, again with respect to observable, structural laws. Functionalism also has an anthropological basis in the work of theorists such as Marcel Mauss , Bronisław Malinowski , and Radcliffe-Brown . It is in the latter's specific usage that the prefix "structural" emerged. [77] Classical functionalist theory is generally united by its tendency towards biological analogy and notions of social evolutionism , in that the basic form of society would increase in complexity and those forms of social organization that promoted solidarity would eventually overcome social disorganization. As Giddens states: [78] Functionalist thought, from Comte onwards, has looked particularly towards biology as the science providing the closest and most compatible model for social science. Biology has been taken to provide a guide to conceptualizing the structure and the function of social systems and to analyzing processes of evolution via mechanisms of adaptation. Functionalism strongly emphasizes the pre-eminence of the social world over its individual parts (i.e. its constituent actors, human subjects). Main article: Conflict theory Functionalist theories emphasize "cohesive systems" and are often contrasted with "conflict theories", which critique the overarching socio-political system or emphasize the inequality between particular groups. The following quotes from Durkheim [79] and Marx [80] epitomize the political, as well as theoretical, disparities, between functionalist and conflict thought respectively: To aim for a civilization beyond that made possible by the nexus of the surrounding environment will result in unloosing sickness into the very society we live in. Collective activity cannot be encouraged beyond the point set by the condition of the social organism without undermining health. Émile Durkheim, The Division of Labour in Society (1893) The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles. Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant opposition to one another, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary re-constitution of society at large, or in the common ruin of the contending classes. Main articles: Symbolic interactionism , Dramaturgy (sociology) , Interpretive sociology , and Phenomenological sociology Symbolic interaction —often associated with interactionism , phenomenology , dramaturgy , interpretivism —is a sociological approach that places emphasis on subjective meanings and the empirical unfolding of social processes, generally accessed through micro-analysis. [81] This tradition emerged in the Chicago School of the 1920s and 1930s, which, prior to World War II, "had been the center of sociological research and graduate study." [82] [ page needed ] The approach focuses on creating a framework for building a theory that sees society as the product of the everyday interactions of individuals. Society is nothing more than the shared reality that people construct as they interact with one another. This approach sees people interacting in countless settings using symbolic communications to accomplish the tasks at hand. Therefore, society is a complex, ever-changing mosaic of subjective meanings. [25] : 19 Some critics of this approach argue that it only looks at what is happening in a particular social situation, and disregards the effects that culture, race or gender (i.e. social-historical structures) may have in that situation. [25] Some important sociologists associated with this approach include Max Weber , George Herbert Mead , Erving Goffman , George Homans , and Peter Blau . It is also in this tradition that the radical-empirical approach of ethnomethodology emerges from the work of Harold Garfinkel . Main articles: Utilitarianism , Rational choice theory , and Exchange theory Utilitarianism is often referred to as exchange theory or rational choice theory in the context of sociology. This tradition tends to privilege the agency of individual rational actors and assumes that within interactions individuals always seek to maximize their own self-interest. As argued by Josh Whitford , rational actors are assumed to have four basic elements: [83] "a knowledge of alternatives;" "a knowledge of, or beliefs about the consequences of the various alternatives;" "an ordering of preferences over outcomes;" and "a decision rule, to select among the possible alternatives" Exchange theory is specifically attributed to the work of George C. Homans , Peter Blau and Richard Emerson. [84] Organizational sociologists James G. March and Herbert A. Simon noted that an individual's rationality is bounded by the context or organizational setting. The utilitarian perspective in sociology was, most notably, revitalized in the late 20th century by the work of former ASA president James Coleman .[ citation needed ] 20th-century social theory[ edit ] Following the decline of theories of sociocultural evolution in the United States, the interactionist thought of the Chicago School dominated American sociology. As Anselm Strauss describes, "we didn't think symbolic interaction was a perspective in sociology; we thought it was sociology." [82] Moreover, philosophical and psychological pragmatism grounded this tradition. [85] After World War II, mainstream sociology shifted to the survey-research of Paul Lazarsfeld at Columbia University and the general theorizing of Pitirim Sorokin , followed by Talcott Parsons at Harvard University . Ultimately, "the failure of the Chicago, Columbia, and Wisconsin [sociology] departments to produce a significant number of graduate students interested in and committed to general theory in the years 1936–45 was to the advantage of the Harvard department." [86] As Parsons began to dominate general theory, his work primarily referenced European sociology—almost entirely omitting citations of both the American tradition of sociocultural-evolution as well as pragmatism. In addition to Parsons' revision of the sociological canon (which included Marshall, Pareto, Weber and Durkheim), the lack of theoretical challenges from other departments nurtured the rise of the Parsonian structural-functionalist movement, which reached its crescendo in the 1950s, but by the 1960s was in rapid decline. [87] By the 1980s, most functionalist perspectives in Europe had broadly been replaced by conflict -oriented approaches, [88] and to many in the discipline, functionalism was considered "as dead as a dodo:" [89] According to Giddens : [90] The orthodox consensus terminated in the late 1960s and 1970s as the middle ground shared by otherwise competing perspectives gave way and was replaced by a baffling variety of competing perspectives. This third 'generation' of social theory includes phenomenologically inspired approaches, critical theory, ethnomethodology , symbolic interactionism , structuralism , post-structuralism , and theories written in the tradition of hermeneutics and ordinary language philosophy . Pax Wisconsana[ edit ] While some conflict approaches also gained popularity in the United States, the mainstream of the discipline instead shifted to a variety of empirically oriented middle-range theories with no single overarching, or "grand", theoretical orientation. John Levi Martin refers to this "golden age of methodological unity and theoretical calm" as the Pax Wisconsana , [91] as it reflected the composition of the sociology department at the University of Wisconsin–Madison : numerous scholars working on separate projects with little contention. [92] Omar Lizardo describes the pax wisconsana as "a Midwestern flavored, Mertonian resolution of the theory/method wars in which [sociologists] all agreed on at least two working hypotheses: (1) grand theory is a waste of time; [and] (2) good theory has to be good to think with or goes in the trash bin." [93] Despite the aversion to grand theory in the latter half of the 20th century, several new traditions have emerged that propose various syntheses: structuralism, post-structuralism, cultural sociology and systems theory.[ citation needed ] Some sociologists have called for a return to 'grand theory' to combat the rise of scientific and pragmatist influences within the tradition of sociological thought (see Duane Rousselle ). [94] Structuralism[ edit ] The structuralist movement originated primarily from the work of Durkheim as interpreted by two European scholars: Anthony Giddens , a sociologist, whose theory of structuration draws on the linguistic theory of Ferdinand de Saussure ; and Claude Lévi-Strauss , an anthropologist. In this context, 'structure' does not refer to 'social structure', but to the semiotic understanding of human culture as a system of signs . One may delineate four central tenets of structuralism: [95] Structure is what determines the structure of a whole. Structuralists believe that every system has a structure. Structuralists are interested in 'structural' laws that deal with coexistence rather than changes. Structures are the 'real things' beneath the surface or the appearance of meaning. The second tradition of structuralist thought, contemporaneous with Giddens, emerges from the American School of social network analysis in the 1970s and 1980s, [96] spearheaded by the Harvard Department of Social Relations led by Harrison White and his students. This tradition of structuralist thought argues that, rather than semiotics, social structure is networks of patterned social relations. And, rather than Levi-Strauss, this school of thought draws on the notions of structure as theorized by Levi-Strauss' contemporary anthropologist, Radcliffe-Brown . [97] Some [98] refer to this as "network structuralism", and equate it to "British structuralism" as opposed to the "French structuralism" of Levi-Strauss. Post-structuralism[ edit ] Post-structuralist thought has tended to reject 'humanist' assumptions in the construction of social theory . [99] Michel Foucault provides an important critique in his Archaeology of the Human Sciences , though Habermas (1986) and Rorty (1986) have both argued that Foucault merely replaces one such system of thought with another. [100] [101] The dialogue between these intellectuals highlights a trend in recent years for certain schools of sociology and philosophy to intersect. The anti-humanist position has been associated with " postmodernism ", a term used in specific contexts to describe an era or phenomena, but occasionally construed as a method.[ citation needed ] Central theoretical problems[ edit ] Overall, there is a strong consensus regarding the central problems of sociological theory, which are largely inherited from the classical theoretical traditions. This consensus is: how to link, transcend or cope with the following "big three" dichotomies: [102] and synchrony and diachrony , which deal with time. Lastly, sociological theory often grapples with the problem of integrating or transcending the divide between micro, meso, and macro-scale social phenomena, which is a subset of all three central problems.[ citation needed ] Subjectivity and objectivity[ edit ] Learn how and when to remove this template message ) The problem of subjectivity and objectivity can be divided into two parts: a concern over the general possibilities of social actions, and the specific problem of social scientific knowledge. In the former, the subjective is often equated (though not necessarily) with the individual, and the individual's intentions and interpretations of the objective. The objective is often considered any public or external action or outcome, on up to society writ large. A primary question for social theorists, then, is how knowledge reproduces along the chain of subjective-objective-subjective, that is to say: how is intersubjectivity achieved? While, historically, qualitative methods have attempted to tease out subjective interpretations, quantitative survey methods also attempt to capture individual subjectivities. Qualitative methods take an approach to objective description known as in situ , meaning that descriptions must have appropriate contextual information to understand the information. [103] The latter concern with scientific knowledge results from the fact that a sociologist is part of the very object they seek to explain, as Bourdieu explains: How can the sociologist effect in practice this radical doubting which is indispensable for bracketing all the presuppositions inherent in the fact that she is a social being, that she is therefore socialised and led to feel "like a fish in water" within that social world whose structures she has internalised? How can she prevent the social world itself from carrying out the construction of the object, in a sense, through her, through these unself-conscious operations or operations unaware of themselves of which she is the apparent subject Pierre Bourdieu, "The Problem of Reflexive Sociology", An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology (1992), p. 235 Structure and agency[ edit ] Main article: Structure and agency Structure and agency, sometimes referred to as determinism versus voluntarism, [104] form an enduring ontological debate in social theory: "Do social structures determine an individual's behaviour or does human agency?" In this context, agency refers to the capacity of individuals to act independently and make free choices, whereas structure relates to factors that limit or affect the choices and actions of individuals (e.g. social class, religion, gender, ethnicity, etc.). Discussions over the primacy of either structure or agency relate to the core of sociological epistemology (i.e. "what is the social world made of?", "what is a cause in the social world, and what is an effect?"). [105] A perennial question within this debate is that of " social reproduction ": how are structures (specifically, structures producing inequality) reproduced through the choices of individuals? Synchrony and diachrony[ edit ] Find sources: "Sociology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2023) Synchrony and diachrony (or statics and dynamics) within social theory are terms that refer to a distinction that emerged through the work of Levi-Strauss who inherited it from the linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure . [97] Synchrony slices moments of time for analysis, thus it is an analysis of static social reality. Diachrony, on the other hand, attempts to analyse dynamic sequences. Following Saussure, synchrony would refer to social phenomena as a static concept like a language, while diachrony would refer to unfolding processes like actual speech. In Anthony Giddens' introduction to Central Problems in Social Theory, he states that, "in order to show the interdependence of action and structure…we must grasp the time space relations inherent in the constitution of all social interaction." And like structure and agency, time is integral to discussion of social reproduction . In terms of sociology, historical sociology is often better positioned to analyse social life as diachronic, while survey research takes a snapshot of social life and is thus better equipped to understand social life as synchronized. Some argue that the synchrony of social structure is a methodological perspective rather than an ontological claim. [97] Nonetheless, the problem for theory is how to integrate the two manners of recording and thinking about social data. Main article: Social research Sociological research methods may be divided into two broad, though often supplementary, categories: [106] Qualitative designs emphasize understanding of social phenomena through direct observation, communication with participants, or analysis of texts, and may stress contextual and subjective accuracy over generality. Quantitative designs approach social phenomena through quantifiable evidence, and often rely on statistical analysis of many cases (or across intentionally designed treatments in an experiment) to establish valid and reliable general claims. Sociologists are often divided into camps of support for particular research techniques. These disputes relate to the epistemological debates at the historical core of social theory. While very different in many aspects, both qualitative and quantitative approaches involve a systematic interaction between theory and data. [107] Quantitative methodologies hold the dominant position in sociology, especially in the United States. [35] In the discipline's two most cited journals, quantitative articles have historically outnumbered qualitative ones by a factor of two. [108] (Most articles published in the largest British journal, on the other hand, are qualitative .) Most textbooks on the methodology of social research are written from the quantitative perspective, [109] and the very term "methodology" is often used synonymously with "statistics". Practically all sociology PhD programmes in the United States require training in statistical methods. The work produced by quantitative researchers is also deemed more 'trustworthy' and 'unbiased' by the general public, [110] though this judgment continues to be challenged by antipositivists. [110] The choice of method often depends largely on what the researcher intends to investigate. For example, a researcher concerned with drawing a statistical generalization across an entire population may administer a survey questionnaire to a representative sample population. By contrast, a researcher who seeks full contextual understanding of an individual's social actions may choose ethnographic participant observation or open-ended interviews. Studies will commonly combine, or 'triangulate' , quantitative and qualitative methods as part of a 'multi-strategy' design. For instance, a quantitative study may be performed to obtain statistical patterns on a target sample, and then combined with a qualitative interview to determine the play of agency . [107] The bean machine , designed by early social research methodologist Sir Francis Galton to demonstrate the normal distribution , which is important to much quantitative hypothesis testing [a] Quantitative methods are often used to ask questions about a population that is very large, making a census or a complete enumeration of all the members in that population infeasible. A 'sample' then forms a manageable subset of a population . In quantitative research, statistics are used to draw inferences from this sample regarding the population as a whole. The process of selecting a sample is referred to as 'sampling' . While it is usually best to sample randomly , concern with differences between specific subpopulations sometimes calls for stratified sampling . Conversely, the impossibility of random sampling sometimes necessitates nonprobability sampling , such as convenience sampling or snowball sampling . [107] Methods[ edit ] The following list of research methods is neither exclusive nor exhaustive: Archival research (or the Historical method ): Draws upon the secondary data located in historical archives and records, such as biographies, memoirs, journals, and so on. Content analysis : The content of interviews and other texts is systematically analysed. Often data is 'coded' as a part of the ' grounded theory ' approach using qualitative data analysis (QDA) software, such as Atlas.ti , MAXQDA , NVivo , [111] or QDA Miner . Experimental research : The researcher isolates a single social process and reproduces it in a laboratory (for example, by creating a situation where unconscious sexist judgements are possible), seeking to determine whether or not certain social variables can cause, or depend upon, other variables (for instance, seeing if people's feelings about traditional gender roles can be manipulated by the activation of contrasting gender stereotypes ). [112] Participants are randomly assigned to different groups that either serve as controls —acting as reference points because they are tested with regard to the dependent variable, albeit without having been exposed to any independent variables of interest—or receive one or more treatments. Randomization allows the researcher to be sure that any resulting differences between groups are the result of the treatment. Longitudinal study : An extensive examination of a specific person or group over a long period of time.[ citation needed ] Observation : Using data from the senses, the researcher records information about social phenomenon or behaviour. Observation techniques may or may not feature participation. In participant observation , the researcher goes into the field (e.g. a community or a place of work), and participates in the activities of the field for a prolonged period of time in order to acquire a deep understanding of it. [25] : 42 Data acquired through these techniques may be analysed either quantitatively or qualitatively. In the observation research, a sociologist might study global warming in some part of the world that is less populated. Program Evaluation is a systematic method for collecting, analyzing, and using information to answer questions about projects, policies and programs, [113] particularly about their effectiveness and efficiency. In both the public and private sectors, stakeholders often want to know whether the programs they are funding, implementing, voting for, or objecting to are producing the intended effect. While program evaluation first focuses on this definition, important considerations often include how much the program costs per participant, how the program could be improved, whether the program is worthwhile, whether there are better alternatives, if there are unintended outcomes, and whether the program goals are appropriate and useful. [114] Survey research : The researcher gathers data using interviews, questionnaires, or similar feedback from a set of people sampled from a particular population of interest. Survey items from an interview or questionnaire may be open-ended or closed-ended. [25] : 40 Data from surveys is usually analysed statistically on a computer. Main article: Computational sociology Sociologists increasingly draw upon computationally intensive methods to analyse and model social phenomena. [115] Using computer simulations , artificial intelligence , text mining , complex statistical methods, and new analytic approaches like social network analysis and social sequence analysis , computational sociology develops and tests theories of complex social processes through bottom-up modelling of social interactions. [7] Although the subject matter and methodologies in social science differ from those in natural science or computer science , several of the approaches used in contemporary social simulation originated from fields such as physics and artificial intelligence. [116] [117] By the same token, some of the approaches that originated in computational sociology have been imported into the natural sciences, such as measures of network centrality from the fields of social network analysis and network science . In relevant literature, computational sociology is often related to the study of social complexity . [118] Social complexity concepts such as complex systems , non-linear interconnection among macro and micro process, and emergence , have entered the vocabulary of computational sociology. [119] A practical and well-known example is the construction of a computational model in the form of an " artificial society ", by which researchers can analyse the structure of a social system. [120] [121] Main articles: Sociology of culture , Cultural criminology , and Cultural studies Sociologists' approach to culture can be divided into "sociology of culture" and "cultural sociology"—terms which are similar, though not entirely interchangeable. Sociology of culture is an older term, and considers some topics and objects as more or less "cultural" than others. Conversely, cultural sociology sees all social phenomena as inherently cultural. [122] Sociology of culture often attempts to explain certain cultural phenomena as a product of social processes, while cultural sociology sees culture as a potential explanation of social phenomena. [123] For Simmel , culture referred to "the cultivation of individuals through the agency of external forms which have been objectified in the course of history." [66] While early theorists such as Durkheim and Mauss were influential in cultural anthropology , sociologists of culture are generally distinguished by their concern for modern (rather than primitive or ancient) society. Cultural sociology often involves the hermeneutic analysis of words, artefacts and symbols, or ethnographic interviews. However, some sociologists employ historical-comparative or quantitative techniques in the analysis of culture, Weber and Bourdieu for instance. The subfield is sometimes allied with critical theory in the vein of Theodor W. Adorno , Walter Benjamin , and other members of the Frankfurt School . Loosely distinct from the sociology of culture is the field of cultural studies . Birmingham School theorists such as Richard Hoggart and Stuart Hall questioned the division between "producers" and "consumers" evident in earlier theory, emphasizing the reciprocity in the production of texts. Cultural Studies aims to examine its subject matter in terms of cultural practices and their relation to power. For example, a study of a subculture (e.g. white working class youth in London) would consider the social practices of the group as they relate to the dominant class. The " cultural turn " of the 1960s ultimately placed culture much higher on the sociological agenda.[ citation needed ] Art, music and literature[ edit ] Main articles: Sociology of literature , Sociology of art , Sociology of film , and Sociology of music Sociology of literature, film, and art is a subset of the sociology of culture. This field studies the social production of artistic objects and its social implications. A notable example is Pierre Bourdieu's Les Règles de L'Art: Genèse et Structure du Champ Littéraire (1992). [124] None of the founding fathers of sociology produced a detailed study of art, but they did develop ideas that were subsequently applied to literature by others. Marx's theory of ideology was directed at literature by Pierre Macherey , Terry Eagleton and Fredric Jameson . Weber's theory of modernity as cultural rationalization, which he applied to music, was later applied to all the arts, literature included, by Frankfurt School writers such as Theodor Adorno and Jürgen Habermas . Durkheim's view of sociology as the study of externally defined social facts was redirected towards literature by Robert Escarpit . Bourdieu's own work is clearly indebted to Marx, Weber and Durkheim.[ citation needed ] Criminality, deviance, law and punishment[ edit ] Main articles: Criminology , Sociology of law , Sociology of punishment , Deviance , and Social disorganization theory Criminologists analyse the nature, causes, and control of criminal activity, drawing upon methods across sociology, psychology , and the behavioural sciences . The sociology of deviance focuses on actions or behaviours that violate norms , including both infringements of formally enacted rules (e.g., crime) and informal violations of cultural norms. It is the remit of sociologists to study why these norms exist; how they change over time; and how they are enforced. The concept of social disorganization is when the broader social systems leads to violations of norms. For instance, Robert K. Merton produced a typology of deviance , which includes both individual and system level causal explanations of deviance. [125] Sociology of law[ edit ] The study of law played a significant role in the formation of classical sociology. Durkheim famously described law as the "visible symbol" of social solidarity. [126] The sociology of law refers to both a sub-discipline of sociology and an approach within the field of legal studies. Sociology of law is a diverse field of study that examines the interaction of law with other aspects of society, such as the development of legal institutions and the effect of laws on social change and vice versa. For example, an influential recent work in the field relies on statistical analyses to argue that the increase in incarceration in the US over the last 30 years is due to changes in law and policing and not to an increase in crime; and that this increase has significantly contributed to the persistence of racial stratification . [127] Communications and information technologies[ edit ] The sociology of communications and information technologies includes "the social aspects of computing, the Internet, new media, computer networks, and other communication and information technologies." [128] Internet and digital media[ edit ] Main article: Sociology of the Internet The Internet is of interest to sociologists in various ways, most practically as a tool for research and as a discussion platform. [129] The sociology of the Internet in the broad sense concerns the analysis of online communities (e.g. newsgroups , social networking sites) and virtual worlds , meaning that there is often overlap with community sociology. Online communities may be studied statistically through network analysis or interpreted qualitatively through virtual ethnography . Moreover, organizational change is catalysed through new media , thereby influencing social change at-large, perhaps forming the framework for a transformation from an industrial to an informational society . One notable text is Manuel Castells ' The Internet Galaxy —the title of which forms an inter-textual reference to Marshall McLuhan 's The Gutenberg Galaxy . [130] Closely related to the sociology of the Internet is digital sociology , which expands the scope of study to address not only the internet but also the impact of the other digital media and devices that have emerged since the first decade of the twenty-first century.[ citation needed ] Main article: Media studies As with cultural studies , media study is a distinct discipline that owes to the convergence of sociology and other social sciences and humanities, in particular, literary criticism and critical theory . Though neither the production process nor the critique of aesthetic forms is in the remit of sociologists, analyses of socializing factors, such as ideological effects and audience reception , stem from sociological theory and method. Thus the 'sociology of the media' is not a subdiscipline per se, but the media is a common and often indispensable topic.[ citation needed ] Main article: Economic sociology The term "economic sociology" was first used by William Stanley Jevons in 1879, later to be coined in the works of Durkheim, Weber, and Simmel between 1890 and 1920. [131] Economic sociology arose as a new approach to the analysis of economic phenomena, emphasizing class relations and modernity as a philosophical concept. The relationship between capitalism and modernity is a salient issue, perhaps best demonstrated in Weber's The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1905) and Simmel's The Philosophy of Money (1900). The contemporary period of economic sociology, also known as new economic sociology, was consolidated by the 1985 work of Mark Granovetter titled "Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness". This work elaborated the concept of embeddedness , which states that economic relations between individuals or firms take place within existing social relations (and are thus structured by these relations as well as the greater social structures of which those relations are a part). Social network analysis has been the primary methodology for studying this phenomenon. Granovetter's theory of the strength of weak ties and Ronald Burt 's concept of structural holes are two of the best known theoretical contributions of this field.[ citation needed ] Work, employment, and industry[ edit ] Main articles: sociology of work and Industrial relations The sociology of work, or industrial sociology, examines "the direction and implications of trends in technological change, globalization , labour markets, work organization, managerial practices and employment relations to the extent to which these trends are intimately related to changing patterns of inequality in modern societies and to the changing experiences of individuals and families the ways in which workers challenge, resist and make their own contributions to the patterning of work and shaping of work institutions." [132] Main article: Sociology of education The sociology of education is the study of how educational institutions determine social structures, experiences, and other outcomes. It is particularly concerned with the schooling systems of modern industrial societies. [133] A classic 1966 study in this field by James Coleman , known as the "Coleman Report", analysed the performance of over 150,000 students and found that student background and socioeconomic status are much more important in determining educational outcomes than are measured differences in school resources (i.e. per pupil spending). [134] The controversy over "school effects" ignited by that study has continued to this day. The study also found that socially disadvantaged black students profited from schooling in racially mixed classrooms, and thus served as a catalyst for desegregation busing in American public schools.[ citation needed ] Main articles: Environmental sociology and Sociology of disaster Environmental sociology is the study of human interactions with the natural environment, typically emphasizing human dimensions of environmental problems, social impacts of those problems, and efforts to resolve them. As with other sub-fields of sociology, scholarship in environmental sociology may be at one or multiple levels of analysis, from global (e.g. world-systems) to local, societal to individual. Attention is paid also to the processes by which environmental problems become defined and known to humans. As argued by notable environmental sociologist John Bellamy Foster , the predecessor to modern environmental sociology is Marx's analysis of the metabolic rift , which influenced contemporary thought on sustainability . Environmental sociology is often interdisciplinary and overlaps with the sociology of risk, rural sociology and the sociology of disaster .[ citation needed ] Main articles: Human ecology , Architectural sociology , Visual sociology , Sociology of space , and Urban sociology Human ecology deals with interdisciplinary study of the relationship between humans and their natural, social, and built environments. In addition to Environmental sociology, this field overlaps with architectural sociology , urban sociology , and to some extent visual sociology . In turn, visual sociology—which is concerned with all visual dimensions of social life—overlaps with media studies in that it uses photography, film and other technologies of media.[ citation needed ] Social pre-wiring[ edit ] Social pre-wiring deals with the study of fetal social behavior and social interactions in a multi-fetal environment. Specifically, social pre-wiring refers to the ontogeny of social interaction . Also informally referred to as, "wired to be social". The theory questions whether there is a propensity to socially oriented action already present before birth. Research in the theory concludes that newborns are born into the world with a unique genetic wiring to be social. [135] Circumstantial evidence supporting the social pre-wiring hypothesis can be revealed when examining newborns' behavior. Newborns, not even hours after birth, have been found to display a preparedness for social interaction . This preparedness is expressed in ways such as their imitation of facial gestures. This observed behavior cannot be attributed to any current form of socialization or social construction . Rather, newborns most likely inherit to some extent social behavior and identity through genetics . [135] Principal evidence of this theory is uncovered by examining Twin pregnancies. The main argument is, if there are social behaviors that are inherited and developed before birth, then one should expect twin foetuses to engage in some form of social interaction before they are born. Thus, ten foetuses were analyzed over a period of time using ultrasound techniques. Using kinematic analysis, the results of the experiment were that the twin foetuses would interact with each other for longer periods and more often as the pregnancies went on. Researchers were able to conclude that the performance of movements between the co-twins were not accidental but specifically aimed. [135] The social pre-wiring hypothesis was proved correct: [135] The central advance of this study is the demonstration that ' social actions ' are already performed in the second trimester of gestation . Starting from the 14th week of gestation twin foetuses plan and execute movements specifically aimed at the co-twin. These findings force us to predate the emergence of social behavior : when the context enables it, as in the case of twin foetuses, other-directed actions are not only possible but predominant over self-directed actions. Family, gender, and sexuality[ edit ] Main articles: Sociology of the family , Sociology of childhood , Sociology of gender , Feminist sociology , Feminist theory , and Queer theory " Rosie the Riveter " was an iconic symbol of the American homefront and a departure from gender roles due to wartime necessity. Family, gender and sexuality form a broad area of inquiry studied in many sub-fields of sociology. A family is a group of people who are related by kinship ties :- Relations of blood / marriage / civil partnership or adoption. The family unit is one of the most important social institutions found in some form in nearly all known societies. It is the basic unit of social organization and plays a key role in socializing children into the culture of their society. The sociology of the family examines the family, as an institution and unit of socialization , with special concern for the comparatively modern historical emergence of the nuclear family and its distinct gender roles . The notion of " childhood " is also significant. As one of the more basic institutions to which one may apply sociological perspectives, the sociology of the family is a common component on introductory academic curricula. Feminist sociology , on the other hand, is a normative sub-field that observes and critiques the cultural categories of gender and sexuality, particularly with respect to power and inequality. The primary concern of feminist theory is the patriarchy and the systematic oppression of women apparent in many societies, both at the level of small-scale interaction and in terms of the broader social structure. Feminist sociology also analyses how gender interlocks with race and class to produce and perpetuate social inequalities. [136] "How to account for the differences in definitions of femininity and masculinity and in sex role across different societies and historical periods" is also a concern. [137] Health, illness, and the body[ edit ] Main articles: Sociology of health and illness and Medical sociology The sociology of health and illness focuses on the social effects of, and public attitudes toward, illnesses, diseases, mental health and disabilities . This sub-field also overlaps with gerontology and the study of the ageing process. Medical sociology , by contrast, focuses on the inner-workings of the medical profession, its organizations, its institutions and how these can shape knowledge and interactions. In Britain, sociology was introduced into the medical curriculum following the Goodenough Report (1944). [138] [139] The sociology of the body and embodiment [140] takes a broad perspective on the idea of "the body" and includes "a wide range of embodied dynamics including human and non-human bodies, morphology, human reproduction, anatomy, body fluids, biotechnology, genetics". This often intersects with health and illness, but also theories of bodies as political, social, cultural, economic and ideological productions. [141] The ISA maintains a Research Committee devoted to "the Body in the Social Sciences". [142] Death, dying, bereavement[ edit ] A subfield of the sociology of health and illness that overlaps with cultural sociology is the study of death, dying and bereavement, [143] sometimes referred to broadly as the sociology of death . This topic is exemplified by the work of Douglas Davies and Michael C. Kearl.[ citation needed ] Knowledge and science[ edit ] Main articles: Sociology of knowledge , Sociology of scientific knowledge , and Sociology of the history of science The sociology of knowledge is the study of the relationship between human thought and the social context within which it arises, and of the effects prevailing ideas have on societies. The term first came into widespread use in the 1920s, when a number of German-speaking theorists, most notably Max Scheler , and Karl Mannheim , wrote extensively on it. With the dominance of functionalism through the middle years of the 20th century, the sociology of knowledge tended to remain on the periphery of mainstream sociological thought. It was largely reinvented and applied much more closely to everyday life in the 1960s, particularly by Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann in The Social Construction of Reality (1966) and is still central for methods dealing with qualitative understanding of human society (compare socially constructed reality ). The "archaeological" and "genealogical" studies of Michel Foucault are of considerable contemporary influence. The sociology of science involves the study of science as a social activity, especially dealing "with the social conditions and effects of science, and with the social structures and processes of scientific activity." [144] Important theorists in the sociology of science include Robert K. Merton and Bruno Latour . These branches of sociology have contributed to the formation of science and technology studies . Both the ASA and the BSA have sections devoted to the subfield of Science, Knowledge and Technology. [145] [146] The ISA maintains a Research Committee on Science and Technology. [147] Main articles: Sociology of leisure and Sociology of sport Sociology of leisure is the study of how humans organize their free time. Leisure includes a broad array of activities, such as sport , tourism, and the playing of games. The sociology of leisure is closely tied to the sociology of work, as each explores a different side of the work–leisure relationship. More recent studies in the field move away from the work–leisure relationship and focus on the relation between leisure and culture. This area of sociology began with Thorstein Veblen 's Theory of the Leisure Class. [148] Peace, war, and conflict[ edit ] Main articles: Peace and conflict studies , Military sociology , and Sociology of terrorism This subfield of sociology studies, broadly, the dynamics of war, conflict resolution, peace movements, war refugees, conflict resolution and military institutions. [149] As a subset of this subfield, military sociology aims towards the systematic study of the military as a social group rather than as an organization . It is a highly specialized sub-field which examines issues related to service personnel as a distinct group with coerced collective action based on shared interests linked to survival in vocation and combat , with purposes and values that are more defined and narrow than within civil society. Military sociology also concerns civilian-military relations and interactions between other groups or governmental agencies. Topics include the dominant assumptions held by those in the military, changes in military members' willingness to fight, military unionization, military professionalism, the increased utilization of women, the military industrial-academic complex, the military's dependence on research, and the institutional and organizational structure of military. [150]
Toggle the table of contents Anthropology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific study of humans, human behavior, and societies This article is about the study of humans. For the study of human origins, see Anthropogeny . For other uses, see Anthropology (disambiguation) . Anthropology is the scientific study of humanity, concerned with human behavior , human biology , cultures , societies , and linguistics , in both the present and past, including past human species . [1] [2] [3] Social anthropology studies patterns of behavior, while cultural anthropology studies cultural meaning, including norms and values. [1] [2] [3] A portmanteau term sociocultural anthropology is commonly used today. [4] Linguistic anthropology studies how language influences social life. Biological or physical anthropology studies the biological development of humans. [1] [2] [3] Archaeological anthropology , often termed as "anthropology of the past," studies human activity through investigation of physical evidence. [5] [6] It is considered a branch of anthropology in North America and Asia , while in Europe , archaeology is viewed as a discipline in its own right or grouped under other related disciplines, such as history and palaeontology . [7] The abstract noun anthropology is first attested in reference to history . [8] [n 1] Its present use first appeared in Renaissance Germany in the works of Magnus Hundt and Otto Casmann . [9] Their Neo-Latin anthropologia derived from the combining forms of the Greek words ánthrōpos ( ἄνθρωπος , " human ") and lógos ( λόγος , " study "). [8] Its adjectival form appeared in the works of Aristotle . [8] It began to be used in English, possibly via French Anthropologie, by the early 18th century. [8] [n 2] Origin and development of the term[ edit ] Bernardino de Sahagún is considered to be the founder of modern anthropology. [10] Through the 19th century[ edit ] In 1647, the Bartholins , early scholars of the University of Copenhagen , defined l'anthropologie as follows: [11] Anthropology, that is to say the science that treats of man, is divided ordinarily and with reason into Anatomy, which considers the body and the parts, and Psychology, which speaks of the soul. [n 3] Sporadic use of the term for some of the subject matter occurred subsequently, such as the use by Étienne Serres in 1839 to describe the natural history, or paleontology, of man, based on comparative anatomy, and the creation of a chair in anthropology and ethnography in 1850 at the French National Museum of Natural History by Jean Louis Armand de Quatrefages de Bréau . Various short-lived organizations of anthropologists had already been formed. The Société Ethnologique de Paris , the first to use the term ethnology , was formed in 1839 and focused on methodically studying human races. After the death of its founder, William Frédéric Edwards , in 1842, it gradually declined in activity until it eventually dissolved in 1862. [12] Meanwhile, the Ethnological Society of New York, currently the American Ethnological Society , was founded on its model in 1842, as well as the Ethnological Society of London in 1843, a break-away group of the Aborigines' Protection Society . [13] These anthropologists of the times were liberal, anti-slavery, and pro- human-rights activists. They maintained international connections.[ citation needed ] Anthropology and many other current fields are the intellectual results of the comparative methods developed in the earlier 19th century. Theorists in diverse fields such as anatomy , linguistics , and ethnology , started making feature-by-feature comparisons of their subject matters, and were beginning to suspect that similarities between animals, languages, and folkways were the result of processes or laws unknown to them then. [14] For them, the publication of Charles Darwin 's On the Origin of Species was the epiphany of everything they had begun to suspect. Darwin himself arrived at his conclusions through comparison of species he had seen in agronomy and in the wild. Darwin and Wallace unveiled evolution in the late 1850s. There was an immediate rush to bring it into the social sciences. Paul Broca in Paris was in the process of breaking away from the Société de biologie to form the first of the explicitly anthropological societies, the Société d'Anthropologie de Paris , meeting for the first time in Paris in 1859. [15] [n 4] When he read Darwin, he became an immediate convert to Transformisme, as the French called evolutionism . [16] His definition now became "the study of the human group, considered as a whole, in its details, and in relation to the rest of nature". [17] Broca, being what today would be called a neurosurgeon , had taken an interest in the pathology of speech. He wanted to localize the difference between man and the other animals, which appeared to reside in speech. He discovered the speech center of the human brain, today called Broca's area after him. His interest was mainly in Biological anthropology , but a German philosopher specializing in psychology, Theodor Waitz , took up the theme of general and social anthropology in his six-volume work, entitled Die Anthropologie der Naturvölker, 1859–1864. The title was soon translated as "The Anthropology of Primitive Peoples". The last two volumes were published posthumously. Waitz defined anthropology as "the science of the nature of man". Following Broca's lead, Waitz points out that anthropology is a new field, which would gather material from other fields, but would differ from them in the use of comparative anatomy, physiology, and psychology to differentiate man from "the animals nearest to him". He stresses that the data of comparison must be empirical, gathered by experimentation. [18] The history of civilization, as well as ethnology, are to be brought into the comparison. It is to be presumed fundamentally that the species, man, is a unity, and that "the same laws of thought are applicable to all men". [19] Waitz was influential among British ethnologists. In 1863, the explorer Richard Francis Burton and the speech therapist James Hunt broke away from the Ethnological Society of London to form the Anthropological Society of London , which henceforward would follow the path of the new anthropology rather than just ethnology. It was the 2nd society dedicated to general anthropology in existence. Representatives from the French Société were present, though not Broca. In his keynote address, printed in the first volume of its new publication, The Anthropological Review, Hunt stressed the work of Waitz, adopting his definitions as a standard. [20] [n 5] Among the first associates were the young Edward Burnett Tylor , inventor of cultural anthropology , and his brother Alfred Tylor , a geologist. Previously Edward had referred to himself as an ethnologist; subsequently, an anthropologist. Similar organizations in other countries followed: The Anthropological Society of Madrid (1865), the American Anthropological Association in 1902, the Anthropological Society of Vienna (1870), the Italian Society of Anthropology and Ethnology (1871), and many others subsequently. The majority of these were evolutionists. One notable exception was the Berlin Society for Anthropology, Ethnology, and Prehistory (1869) founded by Rudolph Virchow , known for his vituperative attacks on the evolutionists. Not religious himself, he insisted that Darwin's conclusions lacked empirical foundation. During the last three decades of the 19th century, a proliferation of anthropological societies and associations occurred, most independent, most publishing their own journals, and all international in membership and association. The major theorists belonged to these organizations. They supported the gradual osmosis of anthropology curricula into the major institutions of higher learning. By 1898, 48 educational institutions in 13 countries had some curriculum in anthropology. None of the 75 faculty members were under a department named anthropology. [21] 20th and 21st centuries[ edit ] Anthropology as a specialized field of academic study developed much through the end of the 19th century. Then it rapidly expanded beginning in the early 20th century to the point where many of the world's higher educational institutions typically included anthropology departments. Thousands of anthropology departments have come into existence, and anthropology has also diversified from a few major subdivisions to dozens more. Practical anthropology, the use of anthropological knowledge and technique to solve specific problems, has arrived; for example, the presence of buried victims might stimulate the use of a forensic archaeologist to recreate the final scene. The organization has also reached a global level. For example, the World Council of Anthropological Associations (WCAA), "a network of national, regional and international associations that aims to promote worldwide communication and cooperation in anthropology", currently contains members from about three dozen nations. [22] Since the work of Franz Boas and Bronisław Malinowski in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, social anthropology in Great Britain and cultural anthropology in the US have been distinguished from other social sciences by their emphasis on cross-cultural comparisons , long-term in-depth examination of context, and the importance they place on participant-observation or experiential immersion in the area of research. Cultural anthropology, in particular, has emphasized cultural relativism , holism , and the use of findings to frame cultural critiques. [23] This has been particularly prominent in the United States, from Boas' arguments against 19th-century racial ideology , through Margaret Mead 's advocacy for gender equality and sexual liberation, to current criticisms of post-colonial oppression and promotion of multiculturalism . Ethnography is one of its primary research designs as well as the text that is generated from anthropological fieldwork. [24] [25] [26] In Great Britain and the Commonwealth countries, the British tradition of social anthropology tends to dominate. In the United States, anthropology has traditionally been divided into the four field approach developed by Franz Boas in the early 20th century: biological or physical anthropology ; social , cultural , or sociocultural anthropology ; archaeological anthropology ; and linguistic anthropology . These fields frequently overlap but tend to use different methodologies and techniques. [27] European countries with overseas colonies tended to practice more ethnology (a term coined and defined by Adam F. Kollár in 1783). It is sometimes referred to as sociocultural anthropology in the parts of the world that were influenced by the European tradition. [28] Further information: American anthropology Anthropology is a global discipline involving humanities, social sciences and natural sciences. Anthropology builds upon knowledge from natural sciences , including the discoveries about the origin and evolution of Homo sapiens , human physical traits, human behavior , the variations among different groups of humans, how the evolutionary past of Homo sapiens has influenced its social organization and culture, and from social sciences , including the organization of human social and cultural relations, institutions, social conflicts, etc. [29] [30] Early anthropology originated in Classical Greece and Persia and studied and tried to understand observable cultural diversity, such as by Al-Biruni of the Islamic Golden Age . [31] [32] As such, anthropology has been central in the development of several new (late 20th century) interdisciplinary fields such as cognitive science , [33] global studies , and various ethnic studies . According to Clifford Geertz , ...anthropology is perhaps the last of the great nineteenth-century conglomerate disciplines still for the most part organizationally intact. Long after natural history, moral philosophy, philology, and political economy have dissolved into their specialized successors, it has remained a diffuse assemblage of ethnology, human biology, comparative linguistics, and prehistory, held together mainly by the vested interests, sunk costs, and administrative habits of academia, and by a romantic image of comprehensive scholarship. [34] Sociocultural anthropology has been heavily influenced by structuralist and postmodern theories, as well as a shift toward the analysis of modern societies. During the 1970s and 1990s, there was an epistemological shift away from the positivist traditions that had largely informed the discipline.[ citation needed ] During this shift, enduring questions about the nature and production of knowledge came to occupy a central place in cultural and social anthropology. In contrast, archaeology and biological anthropology remained largely positivist. Due to this difference in epistemology, the four sub-fields of anthropology have lacked cohesion over the last several decades.[ citation needed ] Main articles: Cultural anthropology , Social anthropology , and Sociocultural anthropology Sociocultural anthropology draws together the principal axes of cultural anthropology and social anthropology . Cultural anthropology is the comparative study of the manifold ways in which people make sense of the world around them, while social anthropology is the study of the relationships among individuals and groups. [35] Cultural anthropology is more related to philosophy , literature and the arts (how one's culture affects the experience for self and group, contributing to a more complete understanding of the people's knowledge, customs, and institutions), while social anthropology is more related to sociology and history. [35] In that, it helps develop an understanding of social structures, typically of others and other populations (such as minorities, subgroups, dissidents, etc.). There is no hard-and-fast distinction between them, and these categories overlap to a considerable degree. Inquiry in sociocultural anthropology is guided in part by cultural relativism , the attempt to understand other societies in terms of their own cultural symbols and values. [24] Accepting other cultures in their own terms moderates reductionism in cross-cultural comparison. [36] This project is often accommodated in the field of ethnography . Ethnography can refer to both a methodology and the product of ethnographic research, i.e. an ethnographic monograph . As a methodology, ethnography is based upon long-term fieldwork within a community or other research site. Participant observation is one of the foundational methods of social and cultural anthropology. [37] Ethnology involves the systematic comparison of different cultures. The process of participant-observation can be especially helpful to understanding a culture from an emic (conceptual, vs. etic , or technical) point of view. The study of kinship and social organization is a central focus of sociocultural anthropology, as kinship is a human universal . Sociocultural anthropology also covers economic and political organization , law and conflict resolution, patterns of consumption and exchange, material culture, technology, infrastructure, gender relations, ethnicity, childrearing and socialization, religion, myth, symbols, values, etiquette, worldview, sports, music, nutrition, recreation, games, food, festivals, and language (which is also the object of study in linguistic anthropology).[ citation needed ] Comparison across cultures is a key element of method in sociocultural anthropology, including the industrialized (and de-industrialized) West. The Standard Cross-Cultural Sample (SCCS) includes 186 such cultures. [38] Main article: Biological anthropology Forensic anthropologists can help identify skeletonized human remains, such as these found lying in scrub in Western Australia, c. 1900–1910. Biological anthropology and physical anthropology are synonymous terms to describe anthropological research focused on the study of humans and non-human primates in their biological, evolutionary, and demographic dimensions. It examines the biological and social factors that have affected the evolution of humans and other primates, and that generate, maintain or change contemporary genetic and physiological variation. [39] Main article: Archaeology Archaeology is the study of the human past through its material remains. Artifacts, faunal remains, and human altered landscapes are evidence of the cultural and material lives of past societies. Archaeologists examine material remains in order to deduce patterns of past human behavior and cultural practices. Ethnoarchaeology is a type of archaeology that studies the practices and material remains of living human groups in order to gain a better understanding of the evidence left behind by past human groups, who are presumed to have lived in similar ways. [40] The Rosetta Stone was an example of ancient communication. Main article: Linguistic anthropology Linguistic anthropology (not to be confused with anthropological linguistics ) seeks to understand the processes of human communications, verbal and non-verbal, variation in language across time and space, the social uses of language, and the relationship between language and culture. [41] It is the branch of anthropology that brings linguistic methods to bear on anthropological problems, linking the analysis of linguistic forms and processes to the interpretation of sociocultural processes. Linguistic anthropologists often draw on related fields including sociolinguistics , pragmatics , cognitive linguistics , semiotics , discourse analysis , and narrative analysis. [42] Main article: Ethnography Ethnography is a method of analysing social or cultural interaction. It often involves participant observation though an ethnographer may also draw from texts written by participants of in social interactions. Ethnography views first-hand experience and social context as important. [43] Tim Ingold distinguishes ethnography from anthropology arguing that anthropology tries to construct general theories of human experience, applicable in general and novel settings, while ethnography concerns itself with fidelity. He argues that the anthropologist must make his writing consistent with their understanding of literature and other theory but notes that ethnography may be of use to the anthropologists and the fields inform one another. [44] Key topics by field: sociocultural[ edit ] Art, media, music, dance and film[ edit ] Part of a series on the
Toggle the table of contents Archaeology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of human activity via material culture For other uses, see Archaeology (disambiguation) . Excavations at Atapuerca , an archaeological site in Spain. Archaeology or archeology [a] is the study of human activity through the recovery and analysis of material culture . The archaeological record consists of artifacts , architecture , biofacts or ecofacts, sites , and cultural landscapes . Archaeology can be considered both a social science and a branch of the humanities . [1] [2] [3] It is usually considered an independent academic discipline , but may also be classified as part of anthropology (in North America – the four-field approach ), history or geography . [4] Archaeologists study human prehistory and history, from the development of the first stone tools at Lomekwi in East Africa 3.3 million years ago up until recent decades. [5] Archaeology is distinct from palaeontology , which is the study of fossil remains. Archaeology is particularly important for learning about prehistoric societies, for which, by definition, there are no written records. Prehistory includes over 99% of the human past, from the Paleolithic until the advent of literacy in societies around the world. [1] Archaeology has various goals, which range from understanding culture history to reconstructing past lifeways to documenting and explaining changes in human societies through time. [6] Derived from the Greek, the term archaeology means "the study of ancient history". [7] The discipline involves surveying , excavation , and eventually analysis of data collected, to learn more about the past. In broad scope, archaeology relies on cross-disciplinary research. Archaeology developed out of antiquarianism in Europe during the 19th century, and has since become a discipline practiced around the world. Archaeology has been used by nation-states to create particular visions of the past. [8] [9] Since its early development, various specific sub-disciplines of archaeology have developed, including maritime archaeology , feminist archaeology , and archaeoastronomy , and numerous different scientific techniques have been developed to aid archaeological investigation. Nonetheless, today, archaeologists face many problems, such as dealing with pseudoarchaeology , the looting of artifacts, [10] [11] a lack of public interest, and opposition to the excavation of human remains. First instances of archaeology[ edit ] Excavations of Nabonidus ( c. 550 BCE) Nabonidus cylinder from Sippar Extract describing the excavation Cuneiform account of the excavation of a foundation deposit belonging to Naram-Sin of Akkad (ruled c. 2200 BCE), by king Nabonidus (ruled c. 550 BCE). [12] [13] In Ancient Mesopotamia , a foundation deposit of the Akkadian Empire ruler Naram-Sin (ruled c. 2200 BCE) was discovered and analysed by king Nabonidus , c. 550 BCE, who is thus known as the first archaeologist. [12] [13] [14] Not only did he lead the first excavations which were to find the foundation deposits of the temples of Šamaš the sun god, the warrior goddess Anunitu (both located in Sippar ), and the sanctuary that Naram-Sin built to the moon god, located in Harran , but he also had them restored to their former glory. [12] He was also the first to date an archaeological artifact in his attempt to date Naram-Sin's temple during his search for it. [15] Even though his estimate was inaccurate by about 1,500 years, it was still a very good one considering the lack of accurate dating technology at the time. [12] [15] [13] Cyriacus of Ancona (fresco by Benozzo Gozzoli ) The science of archaeology (from Greek ἀρχαιολογία, archaiologia from ἀρχαῖος, arkhaios, "ancient" and -λογία, -logia, " -logy ") [16] grew out of the older multi-disciplinary study known as antiquarianism . Antiquarians studied history with particular attention to ancient artifacts and manuscripts, as well as historical sites. Antiquarianism focused on the empirical evidence that existed for the understanding of the past, encapsulated in the motto of the 18th century antiquary, Sir Richard Colt Hoare : "We speak from facts not theory". Tentative steps towards the systematization of archaeology as a science took place during the Enlightenment period in Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries. [17] In Imperial China during the Song dynasty (960–1279), figures such as Ouyang Xiu [18] and Zhao Mingcheng established the tradition of Chinese epigraphy by investigating, preserving, and analyzing ancient Chinese bronze inscriptions from the Shang and Zhou periods. [19] [20] (p74) [21] (p95) In his book published in 1088, Shen Kuo criticized contemporary Chinese scholars for attributing ancient bronze vessels as creations of famous sages rather than artisan commoners, and for attempting to revive them for ritual use without discerning their original functionality and purpose of manufacture. [22] Such antiquarian pursuits waned after the Song period, were revived in the 17th century during the Qing dynasty , but were always considered a branch of Chinese historiography rather than a separate discipline of archaeology. [20] (pp74–76) [21] (p97) In Renaissance Europe , philosophical interest in the remains of Greco - Roman civilization and the rediscovery of classical culture began in the late Middle Ages , with humanism . Cyriacus of Ancona was a restlessly itinerant Italian humanist and antiquarian who came from a prominent family of merchants in Ancona , a maritime republic on the Adriatic . He was called by his contemporaries pater antiquitatis ('father of antiquity') and today "father of classical archaeology": "Cyriac of Ancona was the most enterprising and prolific recorder of Greek and Roman antiquities, particularly inscriptions, in the fifteenth century, and the general accuracy of his records entitles him to be called the founding father of modern classical archeology." [23] He traveled throughout Greece and all around the Eastern Mediterranean, to record his findings on ancient buildings, statues and inscriptions, including archaeological remains still unknown to his time: the Parthenon , Delphi , the Egyptian pyramids , the hieroglyphics . [24] He noted down his archaeological discoveries in his diary, Commentaria (in six volumes). Flavio Biondo , an Italian Renaissance humanist historian, created a systematic guide to the ruins and topography of ancient Rome in the early 15th century, for which he has been called an early founder of archaeology. [25] Antiquarians of the 16th century, including John Leland and William Camden , conducted surveys of the English countryside, drawing, describing and interpreting the monuments that they encountered. [26] [27] The OED first cites "archaeologist" from 1824; this soon took over as the usual term for one major branch of antiquarian activity. "Archaeology", from 1607 onward, initially meant what we would call "ancient history" generally, with the narrower modern sense first seen in 1837. However, it was Jacob Spon who, in 1685, offered one of the earliest definitions of "archaeologia" to describe the study of antiquities in which he was engaged, in the preface of a collection of transcriptions of Roman inscriptions whiche he had gleaned over the years of his travels, entitled Miscellanea eruditae antiquitatis. Twelfth-century Indian scholar Kalhana 's writings involved recording of local traditions, examining manuscripts, inscriptions, coins and architectures, which is described as one of the earliest traces of archaeology. One of his notable work is called Rajatarangini which was completed in c. 1150 and is described as one of the first history books of India. [28] [29] [30] An early photograph of Stonehenge taken July 1877 Johann Joachim Winckelmann (Raphael Mengs after 1755) One of the first sites to undergo archaeological excavation was Stonehenge and other megalithic monuments in England. John Aubrey (1626–1697) was a pioneer archaeologist who recorded numerous megalithic and other field monuments in southern England. He was also ahead of his time in the analysis of his findings. He attempted to chart the chronological stylistic evolution of handwriting, medieval architecture, costume, and shield-shapes. [31] Excavations were also carried out by the Spanish military engineer Roque Joaquín de Alcubierre in the ancient towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum , both of which had been covered by ash during the Eruption of Mount Vesuvius in AD 79 . These excavations began in 1748 in Pompeii, while in Herculaneum they began in 1738. The discovery of entire towns, complete with utensils and even human shapes, as well the unearthing of frescos , had a big impact throughout Europe. However, prior to the development of modern techniques, excavations tended to be haphazard; the importance of concepts such as stratification and context were overlooked. [32] In the mid-18th century, the German Johann Joachim Winckelmann lived in Rome and devoted himself to the study of Roman antiquities and gradually acquired an unrivalled knowledge of ancient art. [33] Then, he visited the archaeological excavations being conducted at Pompeii and Herculaneum . [34] He was one of the founders of scientific archaeology and first applied the categories of style on a large, systematic basis to the history of art [35] He was one of the first to separate Greek art into periods and time classifications. [36] Winckelmann has been called both "The prophet and founding hero of modern archaeology " [37] and the father of the discipline of art history . [38] Development of archaeological method[ edit ] Artifacts discovered at the 1808 Bush Barrow excavation by Sir Richard Colt Hoare and William Cunnington . The father of archaeological excavation was William Cunnington (1754–1810). He undertook excavations in Wiltshire from around 1798, [39] funded by Sir Richard Colt Hoare. Cunnington made meticulous recordings of Neolithic and Bronze Age barrows , and the terms he used to categorize and describe them are still used by archaeologists today. [40] However, it is to be recorded that future U.S. President Thomas Jefferson , also proceeded to do his own excavations in 1784, using the trench method , on several Native American burial mounds in Virginia . His excavations were prompted by the "Moundbuilders" question , however his careful methods allowed him enough insight to admitting that he saw no reason why the ancestors of the present-day Native Americans themselves could not have raised those mounds. [41] One of the major achievements of 19th-century archaeology was the development of stratigraphy . The idea of overlapping strata tracing back to successive periods was borrowed from the new geological and paleontological work of scholars like William Smith , James Hutton and Charles Lyell . The systematic application of stratigraphy to archaeology first took place with the excavations of prehistorical and Bronze Age sites. In the third and fourth decades of the 19th century, archaeologists like Jacques Boucher de Perthes and Christian Jürgensen Thomsen began to put the artifacts they had found in chronological order. This photo is made of a single goat hair from a textile found on the 14th century ship in Tallinn, Estonia. Photo was done in archaeology department (University of Tartu) by microscope Olympus BX51, magnification 200x A major figure in the development of archaeology into a rigorous science was the army officer and ethnologist , Augustus Pitt Rivers , [42] who began excavations on his land in England in the 1880s. His approach was highly methodical by the standards of the time, and he is widely regarded as the first scientific archaeologist. He arranged his artifacts by type or " typologically , and within types by date or "chronologically". This style of arrangement, designed to highlight the evolutionary trends in human artifacts, was of enormous significance for the accurate dating of the objects. His most important methodological innovation was his insistence that all artifacts, not just beautiful or unique ones, be collected and catalogued. [43] Archaeological excavation of a Stone Age settlement at Glamilders in Långbergsöda village, Saltvik , Åland , in 1906. William Flinders Petrie is another man who may legitimately be called the Father of Archaeology. His painstaking recording and study of artifacts, both in Egypt and later in Palestine , laid down many of the ideas behind modern archaeological recording; he remarked that "I believe the true line of research lies in the noting and comparison of the smallest details." Petrie developed the system of dating layers based on pottery and ceramic findings , which revolutionized the chronological basis of Egyptology . Petrie was the first to scientifically investigate the Great Pyramid in Egypt during the 1880s. [44] He was also responsible for mentoring and training a whole generation of Egyptologists, including Howard Carter who went on to achieve fame with the discovery of the tomb of 14th-century BC pharaoh Tutankhamun . Mortimer Wheeler pioneered systematic excavation in the early 20th century. Pictured, are his excavations at Maiden Castle, Dorset , in October 1937. The first stratigraphic excavation to reach wide popularity with public was that of Hissarlik , on the site of ancient Troy , carried out by Heinrich Schliemann , Frank Calvert and Wilhelm Dörpfeld in the 1870s. These scholars individuated nine different cities that had overlapped with one another, from prehistory to the Hellenistic period . [45] Meanwhile, the work of Sir Arthur Evans at Knossos in Crete revealed the ancient existence of an equally advanced Minoan civilization . [46] The next major figure in the development of archaeology was Sir Mortimer Wheeler , whose highly disciplined approach to excavation and systematic coverage in the 1920s and 1930s brought the science on swiftly. Wheeler developed the grid system of excavation , [47] which was further improved by his student Kathleen Kenyon . Archaeology became a professional activity in the first half of the 20th century, and it became possible to study archaeology as a subject in universities and even schools. By the end of the 20th century nearly all professional archaeologists, at least in developed countries, were graduates. Further adaptation and innovation in archaeology continued in this period, when maritime archaeology and urban archaeology became more prevalent and rescue archaeology was developed as a result of increasing commercial development. [48] Purpose[ edit ] Cast of the skull of the Taung child , uncovered in South Africa . The Child was an infant of the Australopithecus africanus species, an early form of hominin The purpose of archaeology is to learn more about past societies and the development of the human race . Over 99% of the development of humanity has occurred within prehistoric cultures, who did not make use of writing , thereby no written records exist for study purposes. Without such written sources, the only way to understand prehistoric societies is through archaeology. Because archaeology is the study of past human activity, it stretches back to about 2.5 million years ago when the first stone tools are found – The Oldowan Industry . Many important developments in human history occurred during prehistory, such as the evolution of humanity during the Paleolithic period, when the hominins developed from the australopithecines in Africa and eventually into modern Homo sapiens . Archaeology also sheds light on many of humanity's technological advances, for instance the ability to use fire, the development of stone tools , the discovery of metallurgy , the beginnings of religion and the creation of agriculture . Without archaeology, little or nothing would be known about the use of material culture by humanity that pre-dates writing. [49] However, it is not only prehistoric, pre-literate cultures that can be studied using archaeology but historic, literate cultures as well, through the sub-discipline of historical archaeology . For many literate cultures, such as Ancient Greece and Mesopotamia , their surviving records are often incomplete and biased to some extent. In many societies, literacy was restricted to the elite classes, such as the clergy , or the bureaucracy of court or temple. The literacy of aristocrats has sometimes been restricted to deeds and contracts. The interests and world-view of elites are often quite different from the lives and interests of the populace. Writings that were produced by people more representative of the general population were unlikely to find their way into libraries and be preserved there for posterity. Thus, written records tend to reflect the biases, assumptions, cultural values and possibly deceptions of a limited range of individuals, usually a small fraction of the larger population. Hence, written records cannot be trusted as a sole source. The material record may be closer to a fair representation of society, though it is subject to its own biases, such as sampling bias and differential preservation. [50] Often, archaeology provides the only means to learn of the existence and behaviors of people of the past. Across the millennia many thousands of cultures and societies and billions of people have come and gone of which there is little or no written record or existing records are misrepresentative or incomplete. Writing as it is known today did not exist in human civilization until the 4th millennium BCE, in a relatively small number of technologically advanced civilizations. In contrast, Homo sapiens has existed for at least 200,000 years, and other species of Homo for millions of years (see Human evolution ). These civilizations are, not coincidentally, the best-known; they are open to the inquiry of historians for centuries, while the study of pre-historic cultures has arisen only recently. Within a literate civilization many events and important human practices may not be officially recorded. Any knowledge of the early years of human civilization – the development of agriculture, cult practices of folk religion, the rise of the first cities – must come from archaeology. In addition to their scientific importance, archaeological remains sometimes have political or cultural significance to descendants of the people who produced them, monetary value to collectors, or strong aesthetic appeal. Many people identify archaeology with the recovery of such aesthetic, religious, political, or economic treasures rather than with the reconstruction of past societies. This view is often espoused in works of popular fiction, such as Raiders of the Lost Ark, The Mummy, and King Solomon's Mines. When unrealistic subjects are treated more seriously, accusations of pseudoscience are invariably levelled at their proponents (see Pseudoarchaeology ). However, these endeavours, real and fictional, are not representative of modern archaeology. Main article: Archaeological theory There is no one approach to archaeological theory that has been adhered to by all archaeologists. When archaeology developed in the late 19th century, the first approach to archaeological theory to be practised was that of cultural-history archaeology , which held the goal of explaining why cultures changed and adapted rather than just highlighting the fact that they did, therefore emphasizing historical particularism . [51] In the early 20th century, many archaeologists who studied past societies with direct continuing links to existing ones (such as those of Native Americans , Siberians , Mesoamericans etc.) followed the direct historical approach , compared the continuity between the past and contemporary ethnic and cultural groups. [51] In the 1960s, an archaeological movement largely led by American archaeologists like Lewis Binford and Kent Flannery arose that rebelled against the established cultural-history archaeology. [52] [53] They proposed a "New Archaeology", which would be more "scientific" and "anthropological", with hypothesis testing and the scientific method very important parts of what became known as processual archaeology . [51] In the 1980s, a new postmodern movement arose led by the British archaeologists Michael Shanks , [54] [55] [56] [57] Christopher Tilley , [58] Daniel Miller , [59] [60] and Ian Hodder , [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] [66] which has become known as post-processual archaeology . It questioned processualism's appeals to scientific positivism and impartiality, and emphasized the importance of a more self-critical theoretical reflexivity .[ citation needed ] However, this approach has been criticized by processualists as lacking scientific rigor, and the validity of both processualism and post-processualism is still under debate. Meanwhile, another theory, known as historical processualism , has emerged seeking to incorporate a focus on process and post-processual archaeology's emphasis of reflexivity and history. [67] Methods[ edit ] Video showing the different works in an archaeological recovery and analysis An archaeological investigation usually involves several distinct phases, each of which employs its own variety of methods. Before any practical work can begin, however, a clear objective as to what the archaeologists are looking to achieve must be agreed upon. This done, a site is surveyed to find out as much as possible about it and the surrounding area. Second, an excavation may take place to uncover any archaeological features buried under the ground. And, third, the information collected during the excavation is studied and evaluated in an attempt to achieve the original research objectives of the archaeologists. It is then considered good practice for the information to be published so that it is available to other archaeologists and historians, although this is sometimes neglected. [30] Remote sensing[ edit ] Before actually starting to dig in a location, remote sensing can be used to look where sites are located within a large area or provide more information about sites or regions. There are two types of remote sensing instruments—passive and active. Passive instruments detect natural energy that is reflected or emitted from the observed scene. Passive instruments sense only radiation emitted by the object being viewed or reflected by the object from a source other than the instrument. Active instruments emit energy and record what is reflected. Satellite imagery is an example of passive remote sensing. Here are two active remote sensing instruments: Lidar: Lidar (light detection and ranging) uses a laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation) to transmit a light pulse and a receiver with sensitive detectors to measure the backscattered or reflected light. Distance to the object is determined by recording the time between the transmitted and backscattered pulses and using the speed of light to calculate the distance travelled. Lidars can determine atmospheric profiles of aerosols, clouds, and other constituents of the atmosphere. Laser altimeter: A laser altimeter uses a lidar (see above) to measure the height of the instrument platform above the surface. By independently knowing the height of the platform with respect to the mean Earth's surface, the topography of the underlying surface can be determined. [69] Monte Albán archaeological site The archaeological project then continues (or alternatively, begins) with a field survey. Regional survey is the attempt to systematically locate previously unknown sites in a region. Site survey is the attempt to systematically locate features of interest, such as houses and middens , within a site. Each of these two goals may be accomplished with largely the same methods. Survey was not widely practised in the early days of archaeology. Cultural historians and prior researchers were usually content with discovering the locations of monumental sites from the local populace, and excavating only the plainly visible features there. Gordon Willey pioneered the technique of regional settlement pattern survey in 1949 in the Viru Valley of coastal Peru , [70] [71] and survey of all levels became prominent with the rise of processual archaeology some years later. [72] Survey work has many benefits if performed as a preliminary exercise to, or even in place of, excavation. It requires relatively little time and expense, because it does not require processing large volumes of soil to search out artifacts. (Nevertheless, surveying a large region or site can be expensive, so archaeologists often employ sampling methods.) [73] As with other forms of non-destructive archaeology, survey avoids ethical issues (of particular concern to descendant peoples) associated with destroying a site through excavation. It is the only way to gather some forms of information, such as settlement patterns and settlement structure. Survey data are commonly assembled into maps , which may show surface features and/or artifact distribution. Inverted kite aerial photo of an excavation of a Roman building at Nesley near Tetbury in Gloucestershire. The simplest survey technique is surface survey. It involves combing an area, usually on foot but sometimes with the use of mechanized transport, to search for features or artifacts visible on the surface. Surface survey cannot detect sites or features that are completely buried under earth, or overgrown with vegetation. Surface survey may also include mini-excavation techniques such as augers , corers, and shovel test pits. If no materials are found, the area surveyed is deemed sterile . Aerial survey is conducted using cameras attached to airplanes , balloons , UAVs , or even Kites . [74] A bird's-eye view is useful for quick mapping of large or complex sites. Aerial photographs are used to document the status of the archaeological dig. Aerial imaging can also detect many things not visible from the surface. Plants growing above a buried human-made structure, such as a stone wall, will develop more slowly, while those above other types of features (such as middens ) may develop more rapidly. Photographs of ripening grain , which changes colour rapidly at maturation, have revealed buried structures with great precision. Aerial photographs taken at different times of day will help show the outlines of structures by changes in shadows. Aerial survey also employs ultraviolet , infrared , ground-penetrating radar wavelengths, Lidar and thermography . [75] Geophysical survey can be the most effective way to see beneath the ground. Magnetometers detect minute deviations in the Earth's magnetic field caused by iron artifacts, kilns , some types of stone structures , and even ditches and middens. Devices that measure the electrical resistivity of the soil are also widely used. Archaeological features whose electrical resistivity contrasts with that of surrounding soils can be detected and mapped. Some archaeological features (such as those composed of stone or brick) have higher resistivity than typical soils, while others (such as organic deposits or unfired clay) tend to have lower resistivity. Although some archaeologists consider the use of metal detectors to be tantamount to treasure hunting, others deem them an effective tool in archaeological surveying. [76] Examples of formal archaeological use of metal detectors include musketball distribution analysis on English Civil War battlefields, metal distribution analysis prior to excavation of a 19th-century ship wreck, and service cable location during evaluation. Metal detectorists have also contributed to archaeology where they have made detailed records of their results and refrained from raising artifacts from their archaeological context. In the UK, metal detectorists have been solicited for involvement in the Portable Antiquities Scheme . Regional survey in underwater archaeology uses geophysical or remote sensing devices such as marine magnetometer, side-scan sonar , or sub-bottom sonar. [77] Excavations at the 3800-year-old Edgewater Park Site , Iowa Archaeological excavation that discovered prehistoric caves in Vill ( Innsbruck ), Austria An archaeologist sifting for POW remains on Wake Island . Archaeological excavation existed even when the field was still the domain of amateurs, and it remains the source of the majority of data recovered in most field projects. It can reveal several types of information usually not accessible to survey, such as stratigraphy , three-dimensional structure, and verifiably primary context. Modern excavation techniques require that the precise locations of objects and features, known as their provenance or provenience, be recorded. This always involves determining their horizontal locations, and sometimes vertical position as well (also see Primary Laws of Archaeology ). Likewise, their association , or relationship with nearby objects and features , needs to be recorded for later analysis. This allows the archaeologist to deduce which artifacts and features were likely used together and which may be from different phases of activity. For example, excavation of a site reveals its stratigraphy; if a site was occupied by a succession of distinct cultures, artifacts from more recent cultures will lie above those from more ancient cultures. Excavation is the most expensive phase of archaeological research, in relative terms. Also, as a destructive process, it carries ethical concerns. As a result, very few sites are excavated in their entirety. Again the percentage of a site excavated depends greatly on the country and "method statement" issued. Sampling is even more important in excavation than in survey. Sometimes large mechanical equipment, such as backhoes ( JCBs ), is used in excavation, especially to remove the topsoil ( overburden ), though this method is increasingly used with great caution. Following this rather dramatic step, the exposed area is usually hand-cleaned with trowels or hoes to ensure that all features are apparent. The next task is to form a site plan and then use it to help decide the method of excavation. Features dug into the natural subsoil are normally excavated in portions to produce a visible archaeological section for recording. A feature, for example a pit or a ditch, consists of two parts: the cut and the fill . The cut describes the edge of the feature, where the feature meets the natural soil. It is the feature's boundary. The fill is what the feature is filled with, and will often appear quite distinct from the natural soil. The cut and fill are given consecutive numbers for recording purposes. Scaled plans and sections of individual features are all drawn on site, black and white and colour photographs of them are taken, and recording sheets are filled in describing the context of each. All this information serves as a permanent record of the now-destroyed archaeology and is used in describing and interpreting the site. Main article: Post-excavation analysis Five of the seven known fossil teeth of Homo luzonensis found in Callao Cave , the Philippines . Once artifacts and structures have been excavated, or collected from surface surveys, it is necessary to properly study them. This process is known as post-excavation analysis , and is usually the most time-consuming part of an archaeological investigation. It is not uncommon for final excavation reports for major sites to take years to be published. At a basic level of analysis, artifacts found are cleaned, catalogued and compared to published collections. This comparison process often involves classifying them typologically and identifying other sites with similar artifact assemblages. However, a much more comprehensive range of analytical techniques are available through archaeological science , meaning that artifacts can be dated and their compositions examined. Bones, plants, and pollen collected from a site can all be analyzed using the methods of zooarchaeology , paleoethnobotany , palynology and stable isotopes [78] while any texts can usually be deciphered . These techniques frequently provide information that would not otherwise be known, and therefore they contribute greatly to the understanding of a site. Computational and virtual archaeology[ edit ] Main articles: Computational archaeology and Virtual archaeology Computer graphics are now used to build virtual 3D models of sites, such as the throne room of an Assyrian palace or ancient Rome. [79] Photogrammetry is also used as an analytical tool, and digital topographical models have been combined with astronomical calculations to verify whether or not certain structures (such as pillars) were aligned with astronomical events such as the sun's position at a solstice . [79] Agent-based modelling and simulation can be used to better understand past social dynamics and outcomes. Data mining can be applied to large bodies of archaeological 'grey literature'. Drones[ edit ] Archaeologists around the world use drones to speed up survey work and protect sites from squatters, builders and miners. In Peru, small drones helped researchers produce three-dimensional models of Peruvian sites instead of the usual flat maps – and in days and weeks instead of months and years. [80] Drones costing as little as £650 have proven useful. In 2013, drones have flown over at least six Peruvian archaeological sites, including the colonial Andean town Machu Llacta 4,000 metres (13,000 ft) above sea level. The drones continue to have altitude problems in the Andes, leading to plans to make a drone blimp , employing open source software. [80] Jeffrey Quilter, an archaeologist with Harvard University said, "You can go up three metres and photograph a room, 300 metres and photograph a site, or you can go up 3,000 metres and photograph the entire valley." [80] In September 2014 drones weighing about 5 kg (11 lb) were used for 3D mapping of the above-ground ruins of the Greek city of Aphrodisias . The data are being analysed by the Austrian Archaeological Institute in Vienna. [81] Main article: Historical archaeology Historical archaeology is the study of cultures with some form of writing and deals with objects and issues from the past. In medieval Europe , archaeologists have explored the illicit burial of unbaptized children in medieval texts and cemeteries. [83] In downtown New York City , archaeologists have exhumed the 18th century remains of the African Burial Ground . When remnants of the WWII Siegfried Line were being destroyed, emergency archaeological digs took place whenever any part of the line was removed, to further scientific knowledge and reveal details of the line's construction. Main article: Ethnoarchaeology Ethnoarchaeology is the ethnographic study of living people, designed to aid in our interpretation of the archaeological record. [84] [85] [86] [87] [88] [89] The approach first gained prominence during the processual movement of the 1960s, and continues to be a vibrant component of post-processual and other current archaeological approaches. [68] [90] [91] [92] [93] Early ethnoarchaeological research focused on hunter-gatherer or foraging societies; today ethnoarchaeological research encompasses a much wider range of human behaviour. Main article: Experimental archaeology Experimental archaeology represents the application of the experimental method to develop more highly controlled observations of processes that create and impact the archaeological record. [94] [95] [96] [97] [98] In the context of the logical positivism of processualism with its goals of improving the scientific rigor of archaeological epistemologies , the experimental method gained importance. Experimental techniques remain a crucial component to improving the inferential frameworks for interpreting the archaeological record. Main article: Archaeological science Archaeometry aims to systematize archaeological measurement. It emphasizes the application of analytical techniques from physics, chemistry, and engineering. It is a field of research that frequently focuses on the definition of the chemical composition of archaeological remains for source analysis. [99] Archaeometry also investigates different spatial characteristics of features, employing methods such as space syntax techniques and geodesy as well as computer-based tools such as geographic information system technology. [100] Rare earth elements patterns may also be used. [101] A relatively nascent subfield is that of archaeological materials, designed to enhance understanding of prehistoric and non-industrial culture through scientific analysis of the structure and properties of materials associated with human activity. [102] Cultural resources management[ edit ] Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Archaeology can be a subsidiary activity within Cultural resources management (CRM), also called Cultural heritage management (CHM) in the United Kingdom. [103] CRM archaeologists frequently examine archaeological sites that are threatened by development. Today, CRM accounts for most of the archaeological research done in the United States and much of that in western Europe as well. In the US, CRM archaeology has been a growing concern since the passage of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, and most taxpayers, scholars, and politicians believe that CRM has helped preserve much of that nation's history and prehistory that would have otherwise been lost in the expansion of cities, dams, and highways. Along with other statutes, the NHPA mandates that projects on federal land or involving federal funds or permits consider the effects of the project on each archaeological site . The application of CRM in the United Kingdom is not limited to government-funded projects. Since 1990, PPG 16 [104] has required planners to consider archaeology as a material consideration in determining applications for new development. As a result, numerous archaeological organizations undertake mitigation work in advance of (or during) construction work in archaeologically sensitive areas, at the developer's expense . In England, ultimate responsibility of care for the historic environment rests with the Department for Culture, Media and Sport [105] in association with English Heritage . [106] In Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , the same responsibilities lie with Historic Scotland , [107] Cadw [108] and the Northern Ireland Environment Agency [109] respectively. In France, the Institut national du patrimoine (The National Institute of Cultural Heritage) trains curators specialized in archaeology. Their mission is to enhance the objects discovered. The curator is the link between scientific knowledge, administrative regulations, heritage objects and the public. Among the goals of CRM are the identification, preservation, and maintenance of cultural sites on public and private lands, and the removal of culturally valuable materials from areas where they would otherwise be destroyed by human activity, such as proposed construction. This study involves at least a cursory examination to determine whether or not any significant archaeological sites are present in the area affected by the proposed construction. If these do exist, time and money must be allotted for their excavation. If initial survey and/or test excavations indicate the presence of an extraordinarily valuable site, the construction may be prohibited entirely. Cultural resources management has, however, been criticized. CRM is conducted by private companies that bid for projects by submitting proposals outlining the work to be done and an expected budget. It is not unheard of for the agency responsible for the construction to choose the proposal that asks for the least funding. CRM archaeologists face considerable time pressure, often being forced to complete their work in a fraction of the time that might be allotted for a purely scholarly endeavour. Compounding the time pressure is the vetting process of site reports that are required (in the US) to be submitted by CRM firms to the appropriate State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO). From the SHPO's perspective there is to be no difference between a report submitted by a CRM firm operating under a deadline, and a multi-year academic project. The result is that for a Cultural Resource Management archaeologist to be successful, they must be able to produce academic quality documents at a corporate world pace. The annual ratio of open academic archaeology positions (inclusive of post-doc , temporary, and non- tenure track appointments) to the annual number of archaeology MA/MSc and PhD students is disproportionate. Cultural Resource Management, once considered an intellectual backwater for individuals with "strong backs and weak minds", [110] has attracted these graduates, and CRM offices are thus increasingly staffed by advance degreed individuals with a track record of producing scholarly articles but who also have extensive CRM field experience. Karl von Habsburg , on a Blue Shield International fact-finding mission in Libya The protection of archaeological finds for the public from catastrophes, wars and armed conflicts is increasingly being implemented internationally. This happens on the one hand through international agreements and on the other hand through organizations that monitor or enforce protection. United Nations , UNESCO and Blue Shield International deal with the protection of cultural heritage and thus also archaeological sites. This also applies to the integration of United Nations peacekeeping . Blue Shield International has undertaken various fact-finding missions in recent years to protect archaeological sites during the wars in Libya, Syria, Egypt and Lebanon. The importance of archaeological finds for identity, tourism and sustainable economic growth is repeatedly emphasized internationally. [111] [112] [113] [114] [115] [116] The President of Blue Shield International, Karl von Habsburg , said during a cultural property protection mission in Lebanon in April 2019 with the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon: "Cultural assets are part of the identity of the people who live in a certain place. If you destroy their culture, you also destroy their identity. Many people are uprooted, often have no prospects anymore and subsequently flee from their homeland." [117] Popular views of archaeology[ edit ] Extensive excavations at Beit She'an , Israel Permanent exhibition in a German multi-storey car park , explaining the archaeological discoveries made during the construction of this building Early archaeology was largely an attempt to uncover spectacular artifacts and features, or to explore vast and mysterious abandoned cities and was mostly done by upper class, scholarly men. This general tendency laid the foundation for the modern popular view of archaeology and archaeologists. Many of the public view archaeology as something only available to a narrow demographic. The job of archaeologist is depicted as a "romantic adventurist occupation". [118] and as a hobby more than a job in the scientific community. Cinema audiences form a notion of "who archaeologists are, why they do what they do, and how relationships to the past are constituted", [118] and is often under the impression that all archaeology takes place in a distant and foreign land, only to collect monetarily or spiritually priceless artifacts. The modern depiction of archaeology has incorrectly formed the public's perception of what archaeology is. Much thorough and productive research has indeed been conducted in dramatic locales such as Copán and the Valley of the Kings , but the bulk of activities and finds of modern archaeology are not so sensational. Archaeological adventure stories tend to ignore the painstaking work involved in carrying out modern surveys, excavations , and data processing. Some archaeologists refer to such off-the-mark portrayals as "pseudoarchaeology". [119] Archaeologists are also very much reliant on public support; the question of for whom they are working is often discussed. [120] Current issues and controversy[ edit ] Public archaeology[ edit ] Motivated by a desire to halt looting, curb pseudoarchaeology, and to help preserve archaeological sites through education and fostering public appreciation for the importance of archaeological heritage, archaeologists are mounting public-outreach campaigns. [121] They seek to stop looting by combatting people who illegally take artifacts from protected sites, and by alerting people who live near archaeological sites of the threat of looting. Common methods of public outreach include press releases, the encouragement of school field trips to sites under excavation by professional archaeologists, and making reports and publications accessible outside of academia. [122] [123] Public appreciation of the significance of archaeology and archaeological sites often leads to improved protection from encroaching development or other threats. One audience for archaeologists' work is the public. Archaeologists increasingly realize that their work can benefit non-academic and non-archaeological audiences, and that they have a responsibility to educate and inform the public about archaeology. Local heritage awareness is aimed at increasing civic and individual pride through projects such as community excavation projects, and better public presentations of archaeological sites and knowledge.[ citation needed ] The U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS) operates a volunteer archaeology and historic preservation program called the Passport in Time (PIT). Volunteers work with professional USFS archaeologists and historians on national forests throughout the U.S. Volunteers are involved in all aspects of professional archaeology under expert supervision. [124] Television programs, web videos and social media can also bring an understanding of underwater archaeology to a broad audience. The Mardi Gras Shipwreck Project [125] integrated a one-hour HD documentary, [126] short videos for public viewing and video updates during the expedition as part of the educational outreach. Webcasting is also another tool for educational outreach. For one week in 2000 and 2001, live underwater video of the Queen Anne's Revenge Shipwreck Project was webcast to the Internet as a part of the QAR DiveLive [127] educational program that reached thousands of children around the world. Southerly, C.; Gillman-Bryan, J. (19 February 2009). Diving on the Queen Anne's Revenge . The American Academy of Underwater Sciences. Archived from the original on 19 February 2009. Created and co-produced by Nautilus Productions and Marine Grafics, this project enabled students to talk to scientists and learn about methods and technologies used by the underwater archaeology team. [128] [129] In the UK, popular archaeology programs such as Time Team and Meet the Ancestors have resulted in a huge upsurge in public interest.[ citation needed ] Where possible, archaeologists now make more provisions for public involvement and outreach in larger projects than they once did, [130] and many local archaeological organizations operate within the Community archaeology framework [131] to expand public involvement in smaller-scale, more local projects. Archaeological excavation, however, is best undertaken by well-trained staff that can work quickly and accurately. Often this requires observing the necessary health and safety and indemnity insurance issues involved in working on a modern building site with tight deadlines. Certain charities and local government bodies sometimes offer places on research projects either as part of academic work or as a defined community project.[ citation needed ] There is also a flourishing industry selling places on commercial training excavations and archaeological holiday tours.[ citation needed ] Archaeologists prize local knowledge and often liaise with local historical and archaeological societies, which is one reason why Community archaeology projects are starting to become more common. Often archaeologists are assisted by the public in the locating of archaeological sites, which professional archaeologists have neither the funding, nor the time to do. Archaeological Legacy Institute (ALI), is a registered 501[c] [3] non-profit, media and education corporation registered in Oregon in 1999. ALI founded a website, The Archaeology Channel to support the organization's mission "to nurturing and bringing attention to the human cultural heritage, by using media in the most efficient and effective ways possible." [132] There is a considerable international body of research focused on archaeology and public value and tangible benefits of archaeology include [133] helping to counteract racism, documenting accomplishments of ignored communities, providing time-depth as a response to short-termism of the modern age, and contributing to human ecology, independent evidence base, historic context development and tourism [134] The delivery of public benefits through archaeology can be summarised as follows: through making a contribution to a shared history, [135] artistic and cultural treasures, local values, place-making and social cohesion, educational benefits, contribution to science and innovation, health and wellbeing, and added economic value to developers. [136] [130] Main article: Pseudoarchaeology Pseudoarchaeology is an umbrella term for all activities that falsely claim to be archaeological but in fact violate commonly accepted and scientific archaeological practices. It includes much fictional archaeological work (discussed above), as well as some actual activity. Many non-fiction authors have ignored the scientific methods of processual archaeology, or the specific critiques of it contained in post-processualism .[ citation needed ] An example of this type is the writing of Erich von Däniken . His 1968 book, Chariots of the Gods? , together with many subsequent lesser-known works, expounds a theory of ancient contacts between human civilization on Earth and more technologically advanced extraterrestrial civilizations. This theory, known as palaeocontact theory , or Ancient astronaut theory , is not exclusively Däniken's, nor did the idea originate with him. Works of this nature are usually marked by the renunciation of well-established theories on the basis of limited evidence, and the interpretation of evidence with a preconceived theory in mind.[ citation needed ] Looting[ edit ] A looter's pit on the morning following its excavation, taken at Rontoy, Huaura Valley, Peru in June 2007. Several small holes left by looters' prospecting probes can be seen, as well as their footprints. Looting of archaeological sites is an ancient problem. For instance, many of the tombs of the Egyptian pharaohs were looted during antiquity . [137] Archaeology stimulates interest in ancient objects, and people in search of artifacts or treasure cause damage to archaeological sites. The commercial and academic demand for artifacts contributes directly to the illicit antiquities trade. Smuggling of antiquities abroad to private collectors has caused great cultural and economic damage in many countries whose governments lack the resources and or the will to deter it. Looters damage and destroy archaeological sites, denying future generations information about their ethnic and cultural heritage. Indigenous peoples especially lose access to and control over their 'cultural resources', ultimately denying them the opportunity to know their past. [138] In 1937, W. F. Hodge the Director of the Southwest Museum released a statement that the museum would no longer purchase or accept collections from looted contexts. [139] The first conviction of the transport of artifacts illegally removed from private property under the Archaeological Resources Protection Act was in 1992 in the State of Indiana. [140] Archaeologists trying to protect artifacts may be placed in danger by looters or locals trying to protect the artifacts from archaeologists who are viewed as looters by the locals. [141] Some historical archaeology sites are subjected to looting by metal detector hobbyists who search for artifacts using increasingly advanced technology. Efforts are underway among all major Archaeological organizations to increase education and legitimate cooperation between amateurs and professionals in the metal detecting community. [142] While most looting is deliberate, accidental looting can occur when amateurs, who are unaware of the importance of Archaeological rigor, collect artifacts from sites and place them into private collections. Descendant peoples[ edit ] In the United States, examples such as the case of Kennewick Man have illustrated the tensions between Native Americans and archaeologists, which can be summarized as a conflict between a need to remain respectful toward sacred burial sites and the academic benefit from studying them. For years, American archaeologists dug on Indian burial grounds and other places considered sacred, removing artifacts and human remains to storage facilities for further study. In some cases human remains were not even thoroughly studied but instead archived rather than reburied. Furthermore, Western archaeologists' views of the past often differ from those of tribal peoples. The West views time as linear; for many natives, it is cyclic. From a Western perspective, the past is long-gone; from a native perspective, disturbing the past can have dire consequences in the present. As a consequence of this, American Indians attempted to prevent archaeological excavation of sites inhabited by their ancestors, while American archaeologists believed that the advancement of scientific knowledge was a valid reason to continue their studies. This contradictory situation was addressed by the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA, 1990), which sought to reach a compromise by limiting the right of research institutions to possess human remains. Due in part to the spirit of postprocessualism , some archaeologists have begun to actively enlist the assistance of indigenous peoples likely to be descended from those under study. Archaeologists have also been obliged to re-examine what constitutes an archaeological site in view of what native peoples believe to constitute sacred space. To many native peoples, natural features such as lakes, mountains or even individual trees have cultural significance. Australian archaeologists especially have explored this issue and attempted to survey these sites to give them some protection from being developed. Such work requires close links and trust between archaeologists and the people they are trying to help and at the same time study. While this cooperation presents a new set of challenges and hurdles to fieldwork, it has benefits for all parties involved. Tribal elders cooperating with archaeologists can prevent the excavation of areas of sites that they consider sacred, while the archaeologists gain the elders' aid in interpreting their finds. There have also been active efforts to recruit aboriginal peoples directly into the archaeological profession. See Repatriation and reburial of human remains A new trend in the heated controversy between First Nations groups and scientists is the repatriation of native artifacts to the original descendants.[ clarification needed ] An example of this occurred on 21 June 2005, when community members and elders from a number of the 10 Algonquian nations in the Ottawa area convened on the Kitigan Zibi reservation near Maniwaki, Quebec , to inter ancestral human remains and burial goods—some dating back 6,000 years. It was not determined, however, if the remains were directly related to the Algonquin people who now inhabit the region. The remains may be of Iroquoian ancestry, since Iroquoian people inhabited the area before the Algonquin. Moreover, the oldest of these remains might have no relation at all to the Algonquin or Iroquois, and belong to an earlier culture who previously inhabited the area.[ citation needed ] The remains and artifacts, including jewelry , tools and weapons , were originally excavated from various sites in the Ottawa Valley , including Morrison and the Allumette Islands . They had been part of the Canadian Museum of Civilization 's research collection for decades, some since the late 19th century. Elders from various Algonquin communities conferred on an appropriate reburial, eventually deciding on traditional red cedar and birch bark boxes lined with red cedar chips, muskrat and beaver pelts .[ citation needed ] An inconspicuous rock mound marks the reburial site where close to 80 boxes of various sizes are buried. Because of this reburial, no further scientific study is possible. Although negotiations were at times tense between the Kitigan Zibi community and museum, they were able to reach agreement. [143] African diaspora archaeology[ edit ] Main article: African diaspora archaeology African Diaspora Archaeology is an area of study within the subfield of historical archaeology that studies those that have been forcibly transported through the Atlantic Slave Trade , the Trans-Saharan Slave Trade , and the Indian Ocean Slave Trade , as well as their descendants. Although of global relevance, most research has been conducted in the Americas and Africa. [144] [145] In the United States, Similar to the experience of Native Americans, the history of African diaspora archaeology is one of controversies over Whiteness in archaeology and anthropology, a lack of inclusion of the African descendant community, [146] and possession of human remains in the collections of universities and museums. [147] In the 1990s, anthropologist Michael Blakey was the director of research during the New York African Burial Ground Project where he initiated a protocol for collaborating with the African descendant community. In 2011, the Society of Black Archaeologists was created in the United States . [148] Co-founders Ayana Omilade Flewellen , archaeologist at the University of California, Riverside and Justin Dunnavant, archaeologist and assistant professor of anthropology at the University of California, Los Angeles intend to build a restorative justice-based structure in archaeology. They suggest to define descendants not only in genealogical terms, but also to welcome input of African Americans whose ancestors had a shared historical experience in enslavement. [149] The United States Senate unanimously passed a bill [150] in December 2020 that centers African American cemeteries at risk in South Carolina. The bill is made to better protect historic African burial grounds and can lead to the creation of an African American Burial Grounds Network . [151] Barbados , eight days after becoming a republic on November 30, 2021, announced plans for the construction of the Newton Enslaved Burial Ground Memorial as well as a museum dedicated to the history of the Atlantic slave trade . [152] The Ghanaian-British architect David Adjaye is to lead the project that is to commemorate an estimated 570 West Africans buried in unmarked graves at the site of the former Newton sugar plantation. [152] [153] Barbados can be seen as a good example of respectful preservation of an African burial ground. Throughout the Americas however the burial grounds are in danger of being destroyed or human remains are being excavated without the descendant community being involved. [154] [155] [156] [157] [158] In 2022, residents on Sint Eustatius , Dutch Caribbean spoke out strongly against what they found were unethical excavations of their ancestors on the Godet African Burial Ground and the Golden Rock African Burial Ground . [159] Climate change and archaeology[ edit ] As anthropogenic climate change affects our environment, projections show that there will be changes in rainfall with increased drought and desertification, increases in intensity and frequency of rainfall, increases in temperature (winter and summer), increases in both the temperature and frequency of heatwaves, rising sea levels, and warmer seas, ocean acidification and changes in oceanic currents. These climate drivers will result in changes to flora and fauna, and changes in ground conditions (both on and below the surface) and so will also affect archaeological deposits and structures, while human responses to the climate crisis will also impact archaeological sites. The archaeologist's knowledge and skills are relevant to supporting society in adapting to a changing climate and a low carbon future. [160] [161] Another effect of higher temperatures has been melting of glaciers and ice patches. This has led to the discovery of artifacts and bodies long buried in the ice, fostering the new field of glacial archaeology. [162] [163] Archaeological sites can be seen as habitats that support ecosystems and fulfil biodiversity goals. [164]
lit. 'inquiry, knowledge from inquiry, or judge' [17] ). It was in that sense that Aristotle used the word in his History of Animals . [18] The ancestor word ἵστωρ is attested early on in Homeric Hymns , Heraclitus , the Athenian ephebes ' oath, and in Boeotic inscriptions (in a legal sense, either "judge" or "witness", or similar). The Greek word was borrowed into Classical Latin as historia, meaning "investigation, inquiry, research, account, description, written account of past events, writing of history, historical narrative, recorded knowledge of past events, story, narrative". History was borrowed from Latin (possibly via Old Irish or Old Welsh ) into Old English as stær ("history, narrative, story"), but this word fell out of use in the late Old English period. [19] Meanwhile, as Latin became Old French (and Anglo-Norman ), historia developed into forms such as istorie, estoire, and historie, with new developments in the meaning: "account of the events of a person's life (beginning of the 12th century), chronicle, account of events as relevant to a group of people or people in general (1155), dramatic or pictorial representation of historical events (c. 1240), body of knowledge relative to human evolution, science (c. 1265), narrative of real or imaginary events, story (c. 1462)". [19] It was from Anglo-Norman that history was brought into Middle English , and it has persisted. It appears in the 13th-century Ancrene Wisse , but seems to have become a common word in the late 14th century, with an early attestation appearing in John Gower 's Confessio Amantis of the 1390s (VI.1383): "I finde in a bok compiled | To this matiere an old histoire, | The which comth nou to mi memoire". In Middle English, the meaning of history was "story" in general. The restriction to the meaning "the branch of knowledge that deals with past events; the formal record or study of past events, esp. human affairs" arose in the mid-15th century. [19] With the Renaissance , older senses of the word were revived, and it was in the Greek sense that Francis Bacon used the term in the late 16th century, when he wrote about natural history . For him, historia was "the knowledge of objects determined by space and time", that sort of knowledge provided by memory (while science was provided by reason , and poetry was provided by fantasy ). [20] In an expression of the linguistic synthetic vs. analytic/isolating dichotomy, English like Chinese (史 vs. 诌) now designates separate words for human history and storytelling in general. In modern German , French , and most Germanic and Romance languages , which are solidly synthetic and highly inflected, the same word is still used to mean both "history" and "story". Historian in the sense of a "researcher of history" is attested from 1531. In all European languages , the substantive history is still used to mean both "what happened with men", and "the scholarly study of the happened", the latter sense sometimes distinguished with a capital letter, or the word historiography . [18] [ further explanation needed ] The adjective historical is attested from 1661, and historic from 1669. [21] Description The title page to The Historians' History of the World Historians write in the context of their own time, and with due regard to the current dominant ideas of how to interpret the past, and sometimes write to provide lessons for their own society. In the words of Benedetto Croce , "All history is contemporary history". History is facilitated by the formation of a "true discourse of past" through the production of narrative and analysis of past events relating to the human race. [22] The modern discipline of history is dedicated to the institutional production of this discourse. All events that are remembered and preserved in some authentic form constitute the historical record. [23] The task of historical discourse is to identify the sources which can most usefully contribute to the production of accurate accounts of past. Therefore, the constitution of the historian's archive is a result of circumscribing a more general archive by invalidating the usage of certain texts and documents (by falsifying their claims to represent the "true past"). Part of the historian's role is to skillfully and objectively use the many sources from the past, most often found in the archives. The process of creating a narrative inevitably generates debate, as historians remember or emphasize different events of the past. [24] The study of history has sometimes been classified as part of the humanities , other times part of the social sciences . [25] It can be seen as a bridge between those two broad areas, incorporating methodologies from both. Some historians strongly support one or the other classification. [26] In the 20th century the Annales school revolutionized the study of history, by using such outside disciplines as economics , sociology , and geography in the study of global history. [27] Traditionally, historians have recorded events of the past, either in writing or by passing on an oral tradition , and attempted to answer historical questions through the study of written documents and oral accounts. From the beginning, historians have used such sources as monuments, inscriptions, and pictures. In general, the sources of historical knowledge can be separated into three categories: what is written, what is said, and what is physically preserved, and historians often consult all three. [28] But writing is the marker that separates history from what comes before. Archaeology is especially helpful in unearthing buried sites and objects, which contribute to the study of history. Archeological finds rarely stand alone, with narrative sources complementing its discoveries. Archeology's methodologies and approaches are independent from the field of history. "Historical archaeology" is a specific branch of archeology which often contrasts its conclusions against those of contemporary textual sources. For example, Mark Leone, the excavator and interpreter of historical Annapolis, Maryland , US, has sought to understand the contradiction between textual documents idealizing "liberty" and the material record, demonstrating the possession of slaves and the inequalities of wealth made apparent by the study of the total historical environment. There are varieties of ways in which history can be organized, including chronologically, culturally , territorially, and thematically. These divisions are not mutually exclusive, and significant intersections are present. It is possible for historians to concern themselves with both the very specific and the very general, though the trend has been toward specialization. The area called Big History resists this specialization, and searches for universal patterns or trends. History has often been studied with some practical or theoretical aim, but may be studied out of simple intellectual curiosity. [29] Prehistory Further information: Protohistory Human history is the memory of the past experience of Homo sapiens sapiens around the world, as that experience has been preserved, largely in written records. By "prehistory", historians mean the recovery of knowledge of the past in an area where no written records exist, or where the writing of a culture is not understood. By studying painting, drawings, carvings, and other artifacts, some information can be recovered even in the absence of a written record. Since the 20th century, the study of prehistory is considered essential to avoid history's implicit exclusion of certain civilizations, such as those of sub-Saharan Africa and pre-Columbian America. Historians in the West have been criticized for focusing disproportionately on the Western world . [30] In 1961, British historian E. H. Carr wrote: The line of demarcation between prehistoric and historical times is crossed when people cease to live only in the present, and become consciously interested both in their past and in their future. History begins with the handing down of tradition; and tradition means the carrying of the habits and lessons of the past into the future. Records of the past begin to be kept for the benefit of future generations. [31] This definition includes within the scope of history the strong interests of peoples, such as Indigenous Australians and New Zealand Māori in the past, and the oral records maintained and transmitted to succeeding generations, even before their contact with European civilization. Historiography Main article: Historiography The title page to La Historia d'Italia Historiography has a number of related meanings. [32] Firstly, it can refer to how history has been produced: the story of the development of methodology and practices (for example, the move from short-term biographical narrative toward long-term thematic analysis). Secondly, it can refer to what has been produced: a specific body of historical writing (for example, "medieval historiography during the 1960s" means "Works of medieval history written during the 1960s"). [32] Thirdly, it may refer to why history is produced: the philosophy of history . As a meta-level analysis of descriptions of the past, this third conception can relate to the first two in that the analysis usually focuses on the narratives, interpretations, world view , use of evidence, or method of presentation of other historians. Historians debate whether history can be taught as a single coherent narrative or a series of competing narratives. [33] [34] Methods A depiction of the ancient Library of Alexandria Historical method basics The following questions are used by historians in modern work. When was the source, written or unwritten, produced ( date )? Where was it produced ( localization )? By whom was it produced ( authorship )? From what pre-existing material was it produced ( analysis )? In what original form was it produced ( integrity )? What is the evidential value of its contents ( credibility )? The first four are known as historical criticism ; the fifth, textual criticism ; and, together, external criticism. The sixth and final inquiry about a source is called internal criticism. Europeans have written and published extensively to pull together a "universal history" in the early modern period. This written corpus and discourse in Europe includes ethnographic encounters, comparative philosophy, as well as archaeological discovery. [35] Herodotus , from the 5th-century BC, [36] has been acclaimed as the "father of history". However, his contemporary Thucydides is credited with having first approached history with a well-developed historical method in the History of the Peloponnesian War . Thucydides, unlike Herodotus, regarded history as the product of the choices and actions of humans, and looked at cause and effect , rather than the result of divine intervention (though Herodotus was not wholly committed to this idea himself). [36] In his historical method, Thucydides emphasized chronology, a nominally neutral point of view, and that the human world was the result of human actions. Greek historians viewed history as cyclical , with events regularly recurring. [37] There was sophisticated use of historical method in ancient and medieval China . The groundwork for professional historiography in East Asia was established by court historian Sima Qian (145–90 BC), author of the Records of the Grand Historian (Shiji) and posthumously known as the Father of Chinese historiography . Saint Augustine was influential in Christian and Western thought at the beginning of the medieval period. Through the Medieval and Renaissance periods, history was often studied through a sacred or religious perspective. Around 1800, German philosopher and historian Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel brought philosophy and a more secular approach in historical study. [29] In the preface to his book, the Muqaddimah (1377), the Arab historian and early sociologist , Ibn Khaldun , warned of 7 mistakes he thought historians committed. In this criticism, he approached the past as strange and in need of interpretation. The originality of Ibn Khaldun was to claim that the cultural difference of another age must govern the evaluation of relevant historical material, to distinguish the principles according to which it might be possible to attempt the evaluation, and to feel the need for experience, in addition to rational principles, in order to assess a culture of the past. Ibn Khaldun criticized "idle superstition and uncritical acceptance of historical data". He introduced a scientific method to the study of history, and referred to it as his "new science". [38] His method laid the groundwork for the observation of the role of state , communication , propaganda and systematic bias in history, [39] and so is sometimes considered to be the "father of historiography" [40] [41] or the "father of the philosophy of history". [42] In the West, historians developed modern methods of historiography in the 17th and 18th centuries, especially in France and Germany. In 1851, Herbert Spencer summarized these methods:"From the successive strata of our historical deposits, they [historians] diligently gather all the highly colored fragments, pounce upon everything that is curious and sparkling and chuckle like children over their glittering acquisitions; meanwhile the rich veins of wisdom that ramify amidst this worthless debris, lie utterly neglected. Cumbrous volumes of rubbish are greedily accumulated, while those masses of rich ore, that should have been dug out, and from which golden truths might have been smelted, are left untaught and unsought." [43] By the "rich ore" Spencer meant scientific theory of history. Meanwhile, Henry Thomas Buckle expressed a dream of history becoming one day a science: "In regard to nature, events apparently the most irregular and capricious have been explained and have been shown to be in accordance with certain fixed and universal laws. This has been done because men of ability and, above all, men of patient, untiring thought have studied events with the view of discovering their regularity, and if human events were subject to a similar treatment, we have every right to expect similar results. [44] Contrary to Buckle's dream, the 19th-century historian with greatest influence on methods became Leopold von Ranke in Germany. He limited history to "what really happened" and by this directed the field further away from science. For Ranke, historical data should be collected carefully, examined objectively and put together with critical rigor. But these procedures "are merely the prerequisites and preliminaries of science. The heart of science is searching out order and regularity in the data being examined and in formulating generalizations or laws about them." [45] As Historians like Ranke and many who followed him have pursued it, no, history is not a science. Thus if Historians tell us that, given the manner in which he practices his craft, it cannot be considered a science, we must take him at his word. If he is not doing science, then, whatever else he is doing, he is not doing science. The traditional Historian is thus no scientist and history, as conventionally practiced, is not a science. [46] In the 20th century, academic historians focused less on epic nationalistic narratives, which often tended to glorify the nation or great men , to more objective and complex analyses of social and intellectual forces. A major trend of historical methodology in the 20th century was to treat history more as a social science rather than art , which traditionally had been the case. Leading advocates of history as a social science were a diverse collection of scholars which included Fernand Braudel and E. H. Carr . Many are noted for their multidisciplinary approach e.g. Braudel combined history with geography. Nevertheless, these multidisciplinary approaches failed to produce a theory of history. So far only one theory of history came from a professional historian. [47] Whatever other theories of history exist, they were written by experts from other fields (for example, Marxian theory of history). The field of digital history has begun to address ways of using computer technology, to pose new questions to historical data and generate digital scholarship. In opposition to the claims of history as a social science, historians such as Hugh Trevor-Roper argued the key to historians' work was the power of the imagination , and hence contended that history should be understood as art. French historians associated with the Annales school introduced quantitative history, using raw data to track the lives of typical individuals, and were prominent in the establishment of cultural history (cf. histoire des mentalités ). Intellectual historians such as Herbert Butterfield have argued for the significance of ideas in history. American historians, motivated by the civil rights era, focused on formerly overlooked ethnic, racial, and socioeconomic groups. A genre of social history to emerge post-WWII was Alltagsgeschichte (History of Everyday Life). Scholars such as Ian Kershaw examined what everyday life was like for ordinary people in 20th-century Germany, especially in Nazi Germany . Marxist historians sought to validate Karl Marx 's theories by analyzing history from a Marxist perspective. In response to the Marxist interpretation of history, historians such as François Furet have offered anti-Marxist interpretations of history. Feminist historians argued for the importance of studying the experience of women. Postmodernists have challenged the validity and need for the study of history on the basis all history is based on the personal interpretation of sources. Keith Windschuttle 's 1994 book, The Killing of History defended the worth of history. Today, most historians begin their research in the archives, on either a physical or digital platform. They often propose an argument and use research to support it. John H. Arnold proposed that history is an argument, which creates the possibility of creating change. [5] Digital information companies, such as Google , have sparked controversy over the role of internet censorship in information access. [48] Marxian theory Main article: Historical materialism The Marxist theory of historical materialism theorises that society is fundamentally determined by the material conditions at any given time – in other words, the relationships which people have with each other in order to fulfill basic needs such as feeding, clothing and housing themselves and their families. [49] Overall, Marx and Engels claimed to have identified five successive stages of the development of these material conditions in Western Europe . [50] Marxist historiography was once orthodoxy in the Soviet Union, but since the communism's collapse there, its influence has significantly reduced. [51] Potential shortcomings in the production of history Many historians believe that the production of history is embedded with bias because events and known facts in history can be interpreted in a variety of ways. Constantin Fasolt suggested that history is linked to politics by the practice of silence itself. [52] He said: "A second common view of the link between history and politics rests on the elementary observation that historians are often influenced by politics." [52] According to Michel-Rolph Trouillot , the historical process is rooted in the archives, therefore silences, or parts of history that are forgotten, may be an intentional part of a narrative strategy that dictates how areas of history are remembered. [24] Historical omissions can occur in many ways and can have a profound effect on historical records. Information can also purposely be excluded or left out accidentally. Historians have coined multiple terms that describe the act of omitting historical information, including: "silencing", [24] "selective memory", [53] and erasures. [54] Gerda Lerner , a twentieth century historian who focused much of her work on historical omissions involving women and their accomplishments, explained the negative impact that these omissions had on minority groups. [53] Environmental historian William Cronon proposed three ways to combat bias and ensure authentic and accurate narratives: narratives must not contradict known fact, they must make ecological sense (specifically for environmental history), and published work must be reviewed by scholarly community and other historians to ensure accountability. [54] Areas of study Particular studies and fields These are approaches to history; not listed are histories of other fields, such as history of science , history of mathematics , and history of philosophy . Ancient history : the study of history from the beginning of human history until the Early Middle Ages. Atlantic history : the study of the history of people living on or near the Atlantic Ocean. Art history : the study of changes in and the social context of art. Comparative history : the historical analysis of social and cultural entities not confined to national boundaries. Contemporary history : the study of recent historical events. Counterfactual history : the study of historical events as they might have happened in different causal circumstances. Cultural history : the study of culture in the past. Digital history : the use of computing technologies to do massive searches in published sources. Economic history : the use of economic models fitted to the past. Intellectual history : the study of ideas in the context of the cultures that produced them and their development over time. Maritime history : the study of maritime transport and all connected subjects. Material history : the study of objects and the stories they can tell. Modern history : the study of modern times, the era after the Middle Ages . Military history : the study of warfare, historical wars, and Naval history , which is sometimes considered to be a sub-branch of military history. Oral history : the collection and study of historical information by utilizing spoken interviews with people who have lived past events. Palaeography : the study of ancient texts. People's history : historical work from the perspective of common people. Political history : the study of politics in the past. Psychohistory : the study of the psychological motivations for historical events. Pseudohistory : studies about the past that fall outside the domain of mainstream history (sometimes equivalent to pseudoscience ). Social history : the study of the process of social change throughout history. Women's history : the history of female human beings. Gender history is related and covers the perspective of gender. World history : the study of history from a global perspective, with special attention to non-Western societies. Periods Main article: Periodization Historical study often focuses on events and developments that occur in particular blocks of time. Historians give these periods of time names in order to allow "organising ideas and classificatory generalisations" to be used by historians. [55] The names given to a period can vary with geographical location, as can the dates of the beginning and end of a particular period. Centuries and decades are commonly used periods and the time they represent depends on the dating system used. Most periods are constructed retrospectively and so reflect value judgments made about the past. The way periods are constructed and the names given to them can affect the way they are viewed and studied. [56] Prehistoric periodization The field of history generally leaves prehistory to archeologists, who have entirely different sets of tools and theories. In archeology , the usual method for periodization of the distant prehistoric past is to rely on changes in material culture and technology, such as the Stone Age , Bronze Age , and Iron Age , with subdivisions that are also based on different styles of material remains. Here prehistory is divided into a series of "chapters" so that periods in history could unfold not only in a relative chronology but also narrative chronology. [57] This narrative content could be in the form of functional-economic interpretation. There are periodizations, however, that do not have this narrative aspect, relying largely on relative chronology, and that are thus devoid of any specific meaning. Despite the development over recent decades of the ability through radiocarbon dating and other scientific methods to give actual dates for many sites or artefacts, these long-established schemes seem likely to remain in use. In many cases neighboring cultures with writing have left some history of cultures without it, which may be used. Periodization, however, is not viewed as a perfect framework, with one account explaining that "cultural changes do not conveniently start and stop (combinedly) at periodization boundaries" and that different trajectories of change need to be studied in their own right before they get intertwined with cultural phenomena. [58] Geographical locations Particular geographical locations can form the basis of historical study, for example, continents , countries , and cities . Understanding why historic events took place is important. To do this, historians often turn to the methods and theory from the discipline of geography. [59] According to Jules Michelet in his book Histoire de France (1833), "without geographical basis, the people, the makers of history, seem to be walking on air". [60] Weather patterns, the water supply, and the landscape of a place all affect the lives of the people who live there. For example, to explain why the ancient Egyptians developed a successful civilization, studying the geography of Egypt is essential. Egyptian civilization was built on the banks of the Nile River, which flooded each year, depositing soil on its banks. The rich soil could help farmers grow enough crops to feed the people in the cities. That meant everyone did not have to farm, so some people could perform other jobs that helped develop the civilization. There is also the case of climate , which historians like Ellsworth Huntington and Ellen Churchill Semple cited as a crucial influence on the course of history. Huntington and Semple further argued that climate has an impact on racial temperament. [61] Regions Allegory of the recognition of the Empire of Brazil and its independence . The painting depicts British diplomat Sir Charles Stuart presenting his letter of credence to Emperor Pedro I of Brazil , who is flanked by his wife Maria Leopoldina , their daughter Maria da Glória (later Queen Maria II of Portugal ), and other dignitaries. At right, a winged figure, representing History, carving the "great event" on a stone tablet. [62] History of Africa begins with the first emergence of modern human beings on the continent, continuing into its modern present as a patchwork of diverse and politically developing states. History of the Americas is the collective history of North and South America, including the Caribbean and Central America. History of North America is the study of the past passed down from generation to generation on the continent in the Earth's Northern and Western Hemispheres. History of the Caribbean begins with the oldest evidence where 7,000-year-old remains have been found. History of Central America is the study of the past passed down from generation to generation on the continent in the Earth's Western Hemisphere. History of South America is the study of the past passed down from generation to generation on the continent in the Earth's Southern and Western Hemispheres. History of Eurasia is the collective history of several distinct peripheral coastal regions: the Middle East, South Asia, East Asia, Southeast Asia, and Europe, linked by the interior mass of the Eurasian Steppe of Central Asia and Eastern Europe. History of Europe describes the passage of time from humans inhabiting the European continent to the present day. History of Asia can be seen as the collective history of several distinct peripheral coastal regions, East Asia, South Asia, and the Middle East, linked by the interior mass of the Eurasian Steppe. History of East Asia is the study of the past passed down from generation to generation in East Asia. History of India is the study of the past passed down from generation to generation in the sub-Himalayan region. History of the Middle East begins with the earliest civilizations in the region now known as the Middle East that were established around 3000 BC, in Mesopotamia (Iraq). History of Southeast Asia has been characterized as interaction between regional players and foreign powers. History of Oceania is the collective history of Australia, New Zealand, and the Pacific Islands. History of Australia starts with the documentation of the Makassar trading with Indigenous Australians on Australia's north coast. History of New Zealand dates back at least 700 years to when it was discovered and settled by Polynesians, who developed a distinct Māori culture centered on kinship links and land. History of the Pacific Islands covers the history of the islands in the Pacific Ocean. History of Antarctica emerges from early Western theories of a vast continent known as Terra Australis, believed to exist in the far south of the globe. Political Political history covers the type of government, the branches of government, leaders, legislation, political activism, political parties, and voting. Military Main article: Military history Military history concerns warfare, strategies, battles, weapons, and the psychology of combat. [63] The "new military history" since the 1970s has been concerned with soldiers more than generals, with psychology more than tactics, and with the broader impact of warfare on society and culture. [64] Religious Main article: History of religion The history of religion has been a main theme for both secular and religious historians for centuries, and continues to be taught in seminaries and academe. Leading journals include Church History , The Catholic Historical Review , and History of Religions . Topics range widely from political and cultural and artistic dimensions, to theology and liturgy. [65] This subject studies religions from all regions and areas of the world where humans have lived. [66] Social Main article: Social history Social history, sometimes called the new social history, is the field that includes history of ordinary people and their strategies and institutions for coping with life. [67] In its "golden age" it was a major growth field in the 1960s and 1970s among scholars, and still is well represented in history departments. In two decades from 1975 to 1995, the proportion of professors of history in American universities identifying with social history rose from 31% to 41%, while the proportion of political historians fell from 40% to 30%. [68] In the history departments of British universities in 2007, of the 5723 faculty members, 1644 (29%) identified themselves with social history while political history came next with 1425 (25%). [69] The "old" social history before the 1960s was a hodgepodge of topics without a central theme, and it often included political movements, like Populism, that were "social" in the sense of being outside the elite system. Social history was contrasted with political history , intellectual history and the history of great men . English historian G. M. Trevelyan saw it as the bridging point between economic and political history, reflecting that, "Without social history, economic history is barren and political history unintelligible." [70] While the field has often been viewed negatively as history with the politics left out, it has also been defended as "history with the people put back in". [71] Subfields
Toggle the table of contents Linguistics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific study of language This article is about the field of study. For publications, see Linguistics (disambiguation) . "Linguist" redirects here. For other uses, see Linguist (disambiguation) . e Linguistics is the scientific study of language . [1] [2] [3] Linguistics is based on a theoretical as well as a descriptive study of language and is also interlinked with the applied fields of language studies and language learning, which entails the study of specific languages. Before the 20th century, linguistics evolved in conjunction with literary study and did not employ scientific methods. [4] Modern-day linguistics is considered a science because it entails a comprehensive, systematic, objective , and precise analysis of all aspects of language [4] – i.e., the cognitive , the social , the cultural , the psychological , the environmental, the biological, the literary, the grammatical, the paleographical , and the structural . [5] Traditional areas of linguistic analysis correspond to syntax (rules governing the structure of sentences), semantics (meaning), morphology (structure of words), phonetics (speech sounds and equivalent gestures in sign languages ), phonology (the abstract sound system of a particular language), and pragmatics (how social context contributes to meaning). [6] Subdisciplines such as biolinguistics (the study of the biological variables and evolution of language) and psycholinguistics (the study of psychological factors in human language) bridge many of these divisions. [7] Linguistics encompasses many branches and subfields that span both theoretical and practical applications. [8] Theoretical linguistics (including traditional descriptive linguistics) is concerned with understanding the universal and fundamental nature of language and developing a general theoretical framework for describing it. [9] Applied linguistics seeks to utilise the scientific findings of the study of language for practical purposes, such as developing methods of improving language education and literacy. [10] Linguistic features may be studied through a variety of perspectives: synchronically (by describing the shifts in a language at a certain specific point of time) or diachronically (through the historical development of language over several periods of time), in monolinguals or in multilinguals , amongst children or amongst adults, in terms of how it is being learned or how it was acquired, as abstract objects or as cognitive structures, through written texts or through oral elicitation, and finally through mechanical data collection or through practical fieldwork. [11] Linguistics emerged from the field of philology ,  of which some branches are more qualitative and holistic in approach. [4] Today, philology and linguistics are now variably described as related fields, subdisciplines, or separate fields of language study but, by and large, linguistics can be seen as an umbrella term. [12] Linguistics is also related to the philosophy of language , stylistics , rhetoric , semiotics , lexicography , and translation . Main article: Historical linguistics Historical linguistics is the study of how language changes in history, particularly with regard to a specific language or a group of languages. Western trends in historical linguistics date back to roughly the late 18th century, when the discipline grew out of philology , the study of ancient texts and oral traditions. [13] Historical linguistics emerged as one of the first few sub-disciplines in the field, and was most widely practised during the late 19th century. [14] Despite a shift in focus in the 20th century towards formalism and generative grammar , which studies the universal properties of language, historical research today still remains a significant field of linguistic inquiry. Subfields of the discipline include language change and grammaticalisation . [15] Historical linguistics studies language change either diachronically (through a comparison of different time periods in the past and present) or in a synchronic manner (by observing developments between different variations that exist within the current linguistic stage of a language). [16] At first, historical linguistics was the cornerstone of comparative linguistics , which involves a study of the relationship between different languages. [17] At that time, scholars of historical linguistics were only concerned with creating different categories of language families , and reconstructing prehistoric proto-languages by using both the comparative method and the method of internal reconstruction . Internal reconstruction is the method by which an element that contains a certain meaning is re-used in different contexts or environments where there is a variation in either sound or analogy. [17] [ better source needed ] The reason for this had been to describe well-known Indo-European languages , many of which had detailed documentation and long written histories. Scholars of historical linguistics also studied Uralic languages , another European language family for which very little written material existed back then. After that, there also followed significant work on the corpora of other languages, such as the Austronesian languages and the Native American language families . The above approach of comparativism in linguistics is now, however, only a small part of the much broader discipline called historical linguistics. The comparative study of specific Indo-European languages is considered a highly specialised field today, while comparative research is carried out over the subsequent internal developments in a language: in particular, over the development of modern standard varieties of languages, and over the development of a language from its standardized form to its varieties. [16] For instance, some scholars also tried to establish super-families , linking, for example, Indo-European, Uralic, and other language families to Nostratic . [18] While these attempts are still not widely accepted as credible methods, they provide necessary information to establish relatedness in language change. This is generally hard to find for events long ago, due to the occurrence of chance word resemblances and variations between language groups. A limit of around 10,000 years is often assumed for the functional purpose of conducting research. [19] It is also hard to date various proto-languages. Even though several methods are available, these languages can be dated only approximately. [20] In modern historical linguistics, we examine how languages change over time, focusing on the relationships between dialects within a specific period. This includes studying morphological, syntactical, and phonetic shifts. Connections between dialects in the past and present are also explored. [21] Syntax and morphology[ edit ] Main articles: Syntax and Morphology (linguistics) Syntax and morphology are branches of linguistics concerned with the order and structure of meaningful linguistic units such as words and morphemes . Syntacticians study the rules and constraints that govern how speakers of a language can organize words into sentences. Morphologists study similar rules for the order of morphemes—sub-word units such as prefixes and suffixes—and how they may be combined to form words. [21] Words, along with clitics , are generally accepted as being the smallest units of syntax. But in most languages, if not all, many words can be related to other words by rules that collectively describe the grammar for that language. For example, English speakers recognize that the words dog and dogs are closely related, differentiated only by the plurality morpheme "-s", only found bound to noun phrases . Speakers of English recognize these relations from their innate knowledge of the English language's rules of word formation. They infer intuitively that dog is to dogs as cat is to cats; and, in similar fashion, dog is to dog catcher as dish is to dishwasher. By contrast, Classical Chinese has very little morphology, using almost exclusively unbound morphemes ("free" morphemes) and depending on word order to convey meaning. (Most words in modern Standard Chinese ["Mandarin"], however, are compounds and most roots are bound.) These are understood as grammars that represent the morphology of the language. The rules understood by a speaker reflect specific patterns or regularities in the way words are formed from smaller units in the language they are using, and how those smaller units interact in speech. In this way, morphology is the branch of linguistics that studies patterns of word formation within and across languages and attempts to formulate rules that model the knowledge of the speakers of those languages. [22] Changes in sound and spelling between a base word and its origin[ clarification needed ] may be partial to[ clarification needed ] literacy skills. Studies show that the presence of modification in phonology and orthography makes morphologically complex words harder to understand and that the absence of modification between a base word and its origin makes morphologically complex words easier to understand. Morphologically complex words are easier to comprehend when they include a base word. [23] Polysynthetic languages , such as Chukchi , have words composed of many morphemes. The Chukchi word "təmeyŋəlevtpəγtərkən", for example, meaning "I have a fierce headache", is composed of eight morphemes t-ə-meyŋ-ə-levt-pəγt-ə-rkən that may be glossed . The morphology of such languages allows for each consonant and vowel to be understood as morphemes, while the grammar of the language indicates the usage and understanding of each morpheme.[ citation needed ] The discipline that deals specifically with the sound changes occurring within morphemes is morphophonology . [24] Semantics and pragmatics[ edit ] Main articles: Formal semantics (linguistics) , Cognitive semantics , and Pragmatics Semantics and pragmatics are branches of linguistics concerned with meaning. These subfields have traditionally been divided according to aspects of meaning: "semantics" refers to grammatical and lexical meanings, while "pragmatics" is concerned with meaning in context. The framework of formal semantics studies the denotations[ clarification needed ] of sentences and how they are composed from the meanings of their constituent expressions. Formal semantics draws heavily on philosophy of language and uses formal tools from logic and computer science . Cognitive semantics ties linguistic meaning to general aspects of cognition, drawing on ideas from cognitive science such as prototype theory . Pragmatics includes features like speech acts , implicature , and talk in interaction . [25] Unlike semantics, which examines meaning that is conventional or "coded" in a given language, pragmatics studies how the transmission of meaning depends not only on the structural and linguistic knowledge (grammar, lexicon, etc.) of the speaker and listener, but also on the context of the utterance, [26] any pre-existing knowledge about those involved, the inferred intent of the speaker, and other factors. [27] In that respect, pragmatics explains how language users can overcome apparent ambiguity since meaning relies on the manner, place, time, etc. of an utterance. [25] [28] Phonetics and phonology[ edit ] Main articles: Phonetics and Phonology Phonetics and phonology are branches of linguistics concerned with sounds (or the equivalent aspects of sign languages). Phonetics is largely concerned with the physical aspects of sounds such as their articulation , acoustics, production, and perception. Phonology is concerned with the linguistic abstractions and categorizations of sounds, and it tells us what sounds are in a language, how they do and can combine into words, and explains why certain phonetic features are important to identifying a word. [29] This paragraph is an excerpt from Linguistic typology .[ edit ] Linguistic typology (or language typology) is a field of linguistics that studies and classifies languages according to their structural features to allow their comparison. Its aim is to describe and explain the structural diversity and the common properties of the world's languages. [30] Its subdisciplines include, but are not limited to phonological typology, which deals with sound features; syntactic typology, which deals with word order and form; lexical typology, which deals with language vocabulary; and theoretical typology, which aims to explain the universal tendencies. [31] Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Linguistic structures are pairings of meaning and form. Any particular pairing of meaning and form is a Saussurean linguistic sign . For instance, the meaning "cat" is represented worldwide with a wide variety of different sound patterns (in oral languages), movements of the hands and face (in sign languages ), and written symbols (in written languages). Linguistic patterns have proven their importance for the knowledge engineering field especially with the ever-increasing amount of available data. Linguists focusing on structure attempt to understand the rules regarding language use that native speakers know (not always consciously). All linguistic structures can be broken down into component parts that are combined according to (sub)conscious rules, over multiple levels of analysis. For instance, consider the structure of the word "tenth" on two different levels of analysis. On the level of internal word structure (known as morphology), the word "tenth" is made up of one linguistic form indicating a number and another form indicating ordinality. The rule governing the combination of these forms ensures that the ordinality marker "th" follows the number "ten." On the level of sound structure (known as phonology), structural analysis shows that the "n" sound in "tenth" is made differently from the "n" sound in "ten" spoken alone. Although most speakers of English are consciously aware of the rules governing internal structure of the word pieces of "tenth", they are less often aware of the rule governing its sound structure. Linguists focused on structure find and analyze rules such as these, which govern how native speakers use language. Grammar[ edit ] Grammar is a system of rules which governs the production and use of utterances in a given language. These rules apply to sound [32] as well as meaning, and include componential subsets of rules, such as those pertaining to phonology (the organisation of phonetic sound systems), morphology (the formation and composition of words), and syntax (the formation and composition of phrases and sentences). [6] Modern frameworks that deal with the principles of grammar include structural and functional linguistics , and generative linguistics . [33] Sub-fields that focus on a grammatical study of language include the following: Phonetics , the study of the physical properties of speech sound production and perception, and delves into their acoustic and articulatory properties Phonology , the study of sounds as abstract elements in the speaker's mind that distinguish meaning ( phonemes ) Morphology , the study of morphemes, or the internal structures of words and how they can be modified Syntax , the study of how words combine to form grammatical phrases and sentences Semantics , the study of lexical and grammatical aspects of meaning [34] Pragmatics , the study of how utterances are used in communicative acts , and the role played by situational context and non-linguistic knowledge in the transmission of meaning [34] Discourse analysis , the analysis of language use in texts (spoken, written, or signed) Stylistics , the study of linguistic factors (rhetoric, diction, stress) that place a discourse in context Semiotics , the study of signs and sign processes (semiosis), indication, designation, likeness, analogy, metaphor, symbolism, signification, and communication Discourse[ edit ] Discourse is language as social practice (Baynham, 1995) and is a multilayered concept. As a social practice, discourse embodies different ideologies through written and spoken texts. Discourse analysis can examine or expose these ideologies. Discourse influences genre, which is chosen in response to different situations and finally, at micro level, discourse influences language as text (spoken or written) at the phonological or lexico-grammatical level. Grammar and discourse are linked as parts of a system. [35] A particular discourse becomes a language variety when it is used in this way for a particular purpose, and is referred to as a register . [36] There may be certain lexical additions (new words) that are brought into play because of the expertise of the community of people within a certain domain of specialization. Registers and discourses therefore differentiate themselves through the use of vocabulary, and at times through the use of style too. People in the medical fraternity, for example, may use some medical terminology in their communication that is specialized to the field of medicine. This is often referred to as being part of the "medical discourse", and so on. Lexicon[ edit ] The lexicon is a catalogue of words and terms that are stored in a speaker's mind. The lexicon consists of words and bound morphemes , which are parts of words that can not stand alone, like affixes . In some analyses, compound words and certain classes of idiomatic expressions and other collocations are also considered to be part of the lexicon. Dictionaries represent attempts at listing, in alphabetical order, the lexicon of a given language; usually, however, bound morphemes are not included. Lexicography , closely linked with the domain of semantics, is the science of mapping the words into an encyclopedia or a dictionary. The creation and addition of new words (into the lexicon) is called coining or neologization , [37] and the new words are called neologisms . It is often believed that a speaker's capacity for language lies in the quantity of words stored in the lexicon. However, this is often considered a myth by linguists. The capacity for the use of language is considered by many linguists to lie primarily in the domain of grammar, and to be linked with competence , rather than with the growth of vocabulary. Even a very small lexicon is theoretically capable of producing an infinite number of sentences. Style[ edit ] Stylistics also involves the study of written, signed, or spoken discourse through varying speech communities, genres, and editorial or narrative formats in the mass media. [38] It involves the study and interpretation of texts for aspects of their linguistic and tonal style. Stylistic analysis entails the analysis of description of particular dialects and registers used by speech communities. Stylistic features include rhetoric , [39] diction, stress, satire, irony , dialogue, and other forms of phonetic variations. Stylistic analysis can also include the study of language in canonical works of literature, popular fiction, news, advertisements, and other forms of communication in popular culture as well. It is usually seen as a variation in communication that changes from speaker to speaker and community to community. In short, Stylistics is the interpretation of text. In the 1960s, Jacques Derrida , for instance, further distinguished between speech and writing, by proposing that written language be studied as a linguistic medium of communication in itself. [40] Palaeography is therefore the discipline that studies the evolution of written scripts (as signs and symbols) in language. [41] The formal study of language also led to the growth of fields like psycholinguistics , which explores the representation and function of language in the mind; neurolinguistics , which studies language processing in the brain; biolinguistics , which studies the biology and evolution of language; and language acquisition , which investigates how children and adults acquire the knowledge of one or more languages. Humanistic[ edit ] The fundamental principle of humanistic linguistics, especially rational and logical grammar , is that language is an invention created by people. A semiotic tradition of linguistic research considers language a sign system which arises from the interaction of meaning and form. [42] The organisation of linguistic levels is considered computational. [43] Linguistics is essentially seen as relating to social and cultural studies because different languages are shaped in social interaction by the speech community . [44] Frameworks representing the humanistic view of language include structural linguistics , among others. [45] Structural analysis means dissecting each linguistic level: phonetic, morphological, syntactic, and discourse, to the smallest units. These are collected into inventories (e.g. phoneme, morpheme, lexical classes, phrase types) to study their interconnectedness within a hierarchy of structures and layers. [46] Functional analysis adds to structural analysis the assignment of semantic and other functional roles that each unit may have. For example, a noun phrase may function as the subject or object of the sentence; or the agent or patient . [47] Functional linguistics , or functional grammar, is a branch of structural linguistics. In the humanistic reference, the terms structuralism and functionalism are related to their meaning in other human sciences . The difference between formal and functional structuralism lies in the way that the two approaches explain why languages have the properties they have. Functional explanation entails the idea that language is a tool for communication, or that communication is the primary function of language. Linguistic forms are consequently explained by an appeal to their functional value, or usefulness. Other structuralist approaches take the perspective that form follows from the inner mechanisms of the bilateral and multilayered language system. [48] Further information: Biolinguistics and Biosemiotics Approaches such as cognitive linguistics and generative grammar study linguistic cognition with a view towards uncovering the biological underpinnings of language. In Generative Grammar , these underpinning are understood as including innate domain-specific grammatical knowledge. Thus, one of the central concerns of the approach is to discover what aspects of linguistic knowledge are innate and which are not. [49] [50] Cognitive linguistics , in contrast, rejects the notion of innate grammar, and studies how the human mind creates linguistic constructions from event schemas , [51] and the impact of cognitive constraints and biases on human language. [52] In cognitive linguistics, language is approached via the senses . [53] [54] A closely related approach is evolutionary linguistics [55] which includes the study of linguistic units as cultural replicators . [56] [57] It is possible to study how language replicates and adapts to the mind of the individual or the speech community. [58] [59] Construction grammar is a framework which applies the meme concept to the study of syntax. [60] [61] [62] [63] The generative versus evolutionary approach are sometimes called formalism and functionalism , respectively. [64] This reference is however different from the use of the terms in human sciences . [65] Methodology[ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2024) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Modern linguistics is primarily descriptive . [66] Linguists describe and explain features of language without making subjective judgments on whether a particular feature or usage is "good" or "bad". This is analogous to practice in other sciences: a zoologist studies the animal kingdom without making subjective judgments on whether a particular species is "better" or "worse" than another. [67] Prescription , on the other hand, is an attempt to promote particular linguistic usages over others, often favouring a particular dialect or " acrolect ". This may have the aim of establishing a linguistic standard , which can aid communication over large geographical areas. It may also, however, be an attempt by speakers of one language or dialect to exert influence over speakers of other languages or dialects (see Linguistic imperialism ). An extreme version of prescriptivism can be found among censors , who attempt to eradicate words and structures that they consider to be destructive to society. Prescription, however, may be practised appropriately in language instruction , like in ELT , where certain fundamental grammatical rules and lexical items need to be introduced to a second-language speaker who is attempting to acquire the language.[ citation needed ] Sources[ edit ] Most contemporary linguists work under the assumption that spoken data and signed data are more fundamental than written data . This is because Speech appears to be universal to all human beings capable of producing and perceiving it, while there have been many cultures and speech communities that lack written communication; Features appear in speech which are not always recorded in writing, including phonological rules , sound changes , and speech errors ; All natural writing systems reflect a spoken language (or potentially a signed one), even with pictographic scripts like Dongba writing Naxi homophones with the same pictogram, and text in writing systems used for two languages changing to fit the spoken language being recorded; Speech evolved before human beings invented writing; Individuals learn to speak and process spoken language more easily and earlier than they do with writing. Nonetheless, linguists agree that the study of written language can be worthwhile and valuable. For research that relies on corpus linguistics and computational linguistics , written language is often much more convenient for processing large amounts of linguistic data. Large corpora of spoken language are difficult to create and hard to find, and are typically transcribed and written. In addition, linguists have turned to text-based discourse occurring in various formats of computer-mediated communication as a viable site for linguistic inquiry. The study of writing systems themselves, graphemics, is, in any case, considered a branch of linguistics. Analysis[ edit ] Before the 20th century, linguists analysed language on a diachronic plane, which was historical in focus. This meant that they would compare linguistic features and try to analyse language from the point of view of how it had changed between then and later. However, with the rise of Saussurean linguistics in the 20th century, the focus shifted to a more synchronic approach, where the study was geared towards analysis and comparison between different language variations, which existed at the same given point of time. At another level, the syntagmatic plane of linguistic analysis entails the comparison between the way words are sequenced, within the syntax of a sentence. For example, the article "the" is followed by a noun, because of the syntagmatic relation between the words. The paradigmatic plane, on the other hand, focuses on an analysis that is based on the paradigms or concepts that are embedded in a given text. In this case, words of the same type or class may be replaced in the text with each other to achieve the same conceptual understanding. Main article: History of linguistics The earliest activities in the description of language have been attributed to the 6th-century-BC Indian grammarian Pāṇini [68] [69] who wrote a formal description of the Sanskrit language in his Aṣṭādhyāyī. [70] [71] Today, modern-day theories on grammar employ many of the principles that were laid down then. [72] Nomenclature[ edit ] Before the 20th century, the term philology , first attested in 1716, [73] was commonly used to refer to the study of language, which was then predominantly historical in focus. [74] [75] Since Ferdinand de Saussure 's insistence on the importance of synchronic analysis , however, this focus has shifted [75] and the term philology is now generally used for the "study of a language's grammar, history, and literary tradition", especially in the United States [76] (where philology has never been very popularly considered as the "science of language"). [73] Although the term linguist in the sense of "a student of language" dates from 1641, [77] the term linguistics is first attested in 1847. [77] It is now the usual term in English for the scientific study of language, [78] [79] though linguistic science is sometimes used. Linguistics is a multi-disciplinary field of research that combines tools from natural sciences, social sciences, formal sciences , and the humanities. [80] [81] [82] [83] Many linguists, such as David Crystal, conceptualize the field as being primarily scientific. [84] The term linguist applies to someone who studies language or is a researcher within the field, or to someone who uses the tools of the discipline to describe and analyse specific languages. [85] Further information: Philology and Grammarian (Greco-Roman) An early formal study of language was in India with Pāṇini , the 6th century BC grammarian who formulated 3,959 rules of Sanskrit morphology . Pāṇini's systematic classification of the sounds of Sanskrit into consonants and vowels, and word classes, such as nouns and verbs, was the first known instance of its kind. In the Middle East, Sibawayh , a Persian, made a detailed description of Arabic in AD 760 in his monumental work, Al-kitab fii an-naħw (الكتاب في النحو, The Book on Grammar), the first known author to distinguish between sounds and phonemes (sounds as units of a linguistic system) . Western interest in the study of languages began somewhat later than in the East, [86] but the grammarians of the classical languages did not use the same methods or reach the same conclusions as their contemporaries in the Indic world. Early interest in language in the West was a part of philosophy, not of grammatical description. The first insights into semantic theory were made by Plato in his Cratylus dialogue , where he argues that words denote concepts that are eternal and exist in the world of ideas. This work is the first to use the word etymology to describe the history of a word's meaning. Around 280 BC, one of Alexander the Great 's successors founded a university (see Musaeum ) in Alexandria , where a school of philologists studied the ancient texts in Greek, and taught Greek to speakers of other languages. While this school was the first to use the word "grammar" in its modern sense, Plato had used the word in its original meaning as " téchnē grammatikḗ " ( Τέχνη Γραμματική), the "art of writing", which is also the title of one of the most important works of the Alexandrine school by Dionysius Thrax . [87] Throughout the Middle Ages , the study of language was subsumed under the topic of philology, the study of ancient languages and texts, practised by such educators as Roger Ascham , Wolfgang Ratke , and John Amos Comenius . [88] Comparative philology[ edit ] In the 18th century, the first use of the comparative method by William Jones sparked the rise of comparative linguistics . [89] Bloomfield attributes "the first great scientific linguistic work of the world" to Jacob Grimm , who wrote Deutsche Grammatik. [90] It was soon followed by other authors writing similar comparative studies on other language groups of Europe. The study of language was broadened from Indo-European to language in general by Wilhelm von Humboldt , of whom Bloomfield asserts: [90] This study received its foundation at the hands of the Prussian statesman and scholar Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767–1835), especially in the first volume of his work on Kavi, the literary language of Java, entitled Über die Verschiedenheit des menschlichen Sprachbaues und ihren Einfluß auf die geistige Entwickelung des Menschengeschlechts (On the Variety of the Structure of Human Language and its Influence upon the Mental Development of the Human Race). 20th-century developments[ edit ] There was a shift of focus from historical and comparative linguistics to synchronic analysis in early 20th century. Structural analysis was improved by Leonard Bloomfield , Louis Hjelmslev ; and Zellig Harris who also developed methods of discourse analysis . Functional analysis was developed by the Prague linguistic circle and André Martinet . As sound recording devices became commonplace in the 1960s, dialectal recordings were made and archived, and the audio-lingual method provided a technological solution to foreign language learning. The 1960s also saw a new rise of comparative linguistics: the study of language universals in linguistic typology . Towards the end of the century the field of linguistics became divided into further areas of interest with the advent of language technology and digitalised corpora . [91] [92] [93] Areas of research[ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Toggle the table of contents Literature From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Written work of art e Literature is any collection of written work, but it is also used more narrowly for writings specifically considered to be an art form, especially prose , fiction , drama , poetry , [1] and including both print and digital writing . [2] In recent centuries, the definition has expanded to include oral literature , also known as orature [3] much of which has been transcribed. [4] [5] Literature is a method of recording, preserving, and transmitting knowledge and entertainment , and can also have a social, psychological, spiritual, or political role. Literature, as an art form, can also include works in various non-fiction genres, such as biography , diaries , memoir , letters , and essays . Within its broad definition, literature includes non-fictional books , articles or other written information on a particular subject. [6] [7] Etymologically , the term derives from Latin literatura/litteratura "learning, a writing, grammar", originally "writing formed with letters", from litera/littera "letter". [8] In spite of this, the term has also been applied to spoken or sung texts. [9] [10] Literature is often referred to synecdochically as "writing", especially creative writing , and poetically as "the craft of writing" (or simply "the craft"). Syd Field described his discipline, screenwriting , as "a craft that occasionally rises to the level of art." [11] Developments in print technology have allowed an ever-growing distribution and proliferation of written works, which now include electronic literature . Definitions[ edit ] Definitions of literature have varied over time. [12] In Western Europe, prior to the 18th century, literature denoted all books and writing. Literature can be seen as returning to older, more inclusive notions, so that cultural studies , for instance, include, in addition to canonical works , popular and minority genres . The word is also used in reference to non-written works: to " oral literature " and "the literature of preliterate culture". A value judgment definition of literature considers it as consisting solely of high quality writing that forms part of the belles-lettres ("fine writing") tradition. [13] An example of this is in the 1910–1911 Encyclopædia Britannica , which classified literature as "the best expression of the best thought reduced to writing". [14] A traditional Kyrgyz manaschi performing part of the Epic of Manas at a yurt camp in Karakol , Kyrgyzstan The use of the term "literature" here poses some issue due to its origins in the Latin littera, "letter", essentially writing. Alternatives such as "oral forms" and "oral genres" have been suggested but the word literature is widely used. [5] Australian Aboriginal culture has thrived on oral traditions and oral histories passed down through tens of thousands of years. In a study published in February 2020, new evidence showed that both Budj Bim and Tower Hill volcanoes erupted between 34,000 and 40,000 years ago. [15] Significantly, this is a "minimum age constraint for human presence in Victoria ", and also could be interpreted as evidence for the oral histories of the Gunditjmara people, an Aboriginal Australian people of south-western Victoria, which tell of volcanic eruptions being some of the oldest oral traditions in existence. [16] An axe found underneath volcanic ash in 1947 had already proven that humans inhabited the region before the eruption of Tower Hill. [15] Oral literature is an ancient human tradition found in "all corners of the world". [17] Modern archaeology has been unveiling evidence of the human efforts to preserve and transmit arts and knowledge that depended completely or partially on an oral tradition, across various cultures: The Judeo-Christian Bible reveals its oral traditional roots; medieval European manuscripts are penned by performing scribes; geometric vases from archaic Greece mirror Homer's oral style. (...) Indeed, if these final decades of the millennium have taught us anything, it must be that oral tradition never was the other we accused it of being; it never was the primitive, preliminary technology of communication we thought it to be. Rather, if the whole truth is told, oral tradition stands out as the single most dominant communicative technology of our species as both a historical fact and, in many areas still, a contemporary reality. [17] The earliest poetry is believed to have been recited or sung, employed as a way of remembering history , genealogy , and law. [18] In Asia, the transmission of folklore, mythologies as well as scriptures in ancient India, in different Indian religions, was by oral tradition, preserved with precision with the help of elaborate mnemonic techniques . [19] The early Buddhist texts are also generally believed to be of oral tradition, with the first by comparing inconsistencies in the transmitted versions of literature from various oral societies such as the Greek, Serbia and other cultures, then noting that the Vedic literature is too consistent and vast to have been composed and transmitted orally across generations, without being written down. [20] According to Goody, the Vedic texts likely involved both a written and oral tradition, calling it a "parallel products of a literate society". [21] All ancient Greek literature was to some degree oral in nature, and the earliest literature was completely so. [22] Homer 's epic poetry, states Michael Gagarin, was largely composed, performed and transmitted orally. [23] As folklores and legends were performed in front of distant audiences, the singers would substitute the names in the stories with local characters or rulers to give the stories a local flavor and thus connect with the audience, but making the historicity embedded in the oral tradition as unreliable. [24] The lack of surviving texts about the Greek and Roman religious traditions have led scholars to presume that these were ritualistic and transmitted as oral traditions, but some scholars disagree that the complex rituals in the ancient Greek and Roman civilizations were an exclusive product of an oral tradition. [25] Writing systems are not known to have existed among Native North Americans (north of Mesoamerica) before contact with Europeans. Oral storytelling traditions flourished in a context without the use of writing to record and preserve history, scientific knowledge, and social practices. [26] While some stories were told for amusement and leisure, most functioned as practical lessons from tribal experience applied to immediate moral, social, psychological, and environmental issues. [27] Stories fuse fictional, supernatural, or otherwise exaggerated characters and circumstances with real emotions and morals as a means of teaching. Plots often reflect real life situations and may be aimed at particular people known by the story's audience. In this way, social pressure could be exerted without directly causing embarrassment or social exclusion. [28] For example, rather than yelling, Inuit parents might deter their children from wandering too close to the water's edge by telling a story about a sea monster with a pouch for children within its reach. [29] The enduring significance of oral traditions is underscored in a systemic literature review on indigenous languages in South Africa, within the framework of contemporary linguistic challenges. Oral literature is crucial for cultural preservation, linguistic diversity, and social justice, as evidenced by the postcolonial struggles and ongoing initiatives to safeguard and promote South African indigenous languages. [30] Oratory[ edit ] Oratory or the art of public speaking was considered a literary art for a significant period of time. [6] From Ancient Greece to the late 19th century, rhetoric played a central role in Western education in training orators, lawyers, counselors, historians, statesmen, and poets. [31] [note 1] Further information: History of writing Limestone Kish tablet from Sumer with pictographic writing; may be the earliest known writing, 3500 BC. Ashmolean Museum Around the 4th millennium BC, the complexity of trade and administration in Mesopotamia outgrew human memory, and writing became a more dependable method of recording and presenting transactions in a permanent form. [33] Though in both ancient Egypt and Mesoamerica , writing may have already emerged because of the need to record historical and environmental events. Subsequent innovations included more uniform, predictable legal systems , sacred texts , and the origins of modern practices of scientific inquiry and knowledge-consolidation , all largely reliant on portable and easily reproducible forms of writing. Early written literature[ edit ] Main articles: History of literature , Ancient literature , and History of books Ancient Egyptian literature , [34] along with Sumerian literature , are considered the world's oldest literatures . [35] The primary genres of the literature of ancient Egypt — didactic texts, hymns and prayers, and tales—were written almost entirely in verse; [36] By the Old Kingdom (26th century BC to 22nd century BC), literary works included funerary texts , epistles and letters, hymns and poems, and commemorative autobiographical texts recounting the careers of prominent administrative officials. It was not until the early Middle Kingdom (21st century BC to 17th century BC) that a narrative Egyptian literature was created. [37] Many works of early periods, even in narrative form, had a covert moral or didactic purpose, such as the Sanskrit Panchatantra .200 BC – 300 AD, based on older oral tradition. [38] [39] Drama and satire also developed as urban culture provided a larger public audience, and later readership, for literary production. Lyric poetry (as opposed to epic poetry) was often the speciality of courts and aristocratic circles, particularly in East Asia where songs were collected by the Chinese aristocracy as poems, the most notable being the Shijing or Book of Songs (1046– c. 600 BC). [40] [41] [42] Egyptian hieroglyphs with cartouches for the name " Ramesses II ", from the Luxor Temple , New Kingdom In ancient China , early literature was primarily focused on philosophy, historiography , military science , agriculture, and poetry . China, the origin of modern paper making and woodblock printing , produced the world's first print cultures . [43] Much of Chinese literature originates with the Hundred Schools of Thought period that occurred during the Eastern Zhou dynasty (769‒269 BC). [44] The most important of these include the Classics of Confucianism , of Daoism , of Mohism , of Legalism , as well as works of military science (e.g. Sun Tzu 's The Art of War , c. 5th century BC) and Chinese history (e.g. Sima Qian 's Records of the Grand Historian , c. 94 BC). Ancient Chinese literature had a heavy emphasis on historiography, with often very detailed court records. An exemplary piece of narrative history of ancient China was the Zuo Zhuan , which was compiled no later than 389 BC, and attributed to the blind 5th-century BC historian Zuo Qiuming . [45] In ancient India , literature originated from stories that were originally orally transmitted. Early genres included drama , fables , sutras and epic poetry . Sanskrit literature begins with the Vedas , dating back to 1500–1000 BC, and continues with the Sanskrit Epics of Iron Age India . [46] [47] The Vedas are among the oldest sacred texts . The Samhitas (vedic collections) date to roughly 1500–1000 BC, and the "circum-Vedic" texts, as well as the redaction of the Samhitas, date to c. 1000‒500 BC, resulting in a Vedic period , spanning the mid-2nd to mid 1st millennium BC, or the Late Bronze Age and the Iron Age . [48] The period between approximately the 6th to 1st centuries BC saw the composition and redaction of the two most influential Indian epics, the Mahabharata [49] [50] and the Ramayana , [51] with subsequent redaction progressing down to the 4th century AD such as Ramcharitmanas . [52] The earliest known Greek writings are Mycenaean ( c. 1600–1100 BC), written in the Linear B syllabary on clay tablets. These documents contain prosaic records largely concerned with trade (lists, inventories, receipts, etc.); no real literature has been discovered. [53] [54] Michael Ventris and John Chadwick , the original decipherers of Linear B, state that literature almost certainly existed in Mycenaean Greece , [54] but it was either not written down or, if it was, it was on parchment or wooden tablets, which did not survive the destruction of the Mycenaean palaces in the twelfth century BC . [54] Homer 's epic poems , the Iliad and the Odyssey , are central works of ancient Greek literature . It is generally accepted that the poems were composed at some point around the late eighth or early seventh century BC. [55] Modern scholars consider these accounts legendary . [56] [57] [58] Most researchers believe that the poems were originally transmitted orally . [59] From antiquity until the present day, the influence of Homeric epic on Western civilization has been significant, inspiring many of its most famous works of literature, music, art and film. [60] The Homeric epics were the greatest influence on ancient Greek culture and education; to Plato , Homer was simply the one who "has taught Greece" – ten Hellada pepaideuken. [61] [62] Hesiod 's Works and Days (c.700 BC) and Theogony are some of the earliest and most influential works of ancient Greek literature. Classical Greek genres included philosophy, poetry, historiography, comedies and dramas. Plato (428/427 or 424/423 – 348/347 BC) and Aristotle (384–322 BC) authored philosophical texts that are regarded as the foundation of Western philosophy , Sappho ( c. 630 – c. 570 BC) and Pindar were influential lyric poets , and Herodotus ( c. 484 – c. 425 BC) and Thucydides were early Greek historians. Although drama was popular in ancient Greece, of the hundreds of tragedies written and performed during the classical age , only a limited number of plays by three authors still exist: Aeschylus , Sophocles , and Euripides . The plays of Aristophanes ( c. 446 – c. 386 BC) provide the only real examples of a genre of comic drama known as Old Comedy , the earliest form of Greek Comedy, and are in fact used to define the genre. [63] The Hebrew religious text, the Torah , is widely seen as a product of the Persian period (539–333 BC, probably 450–350 BC). [64] This consensus echoes a traditional Jewish view which gives Ezra , the leader of the Jewish community on its return from Babylon, a pivotal role in its promulgation. [65] This represents a major source of Christianity's Bible, which has had a major influence on Western literature. [66] The beginning of Roman literature dates to 240 BC, when a Roman audience saw a Latin version of a Greek play. [67] Literature in Latin would flourish for the next six centuries, and includes essays, histories, poems, plays, and other writings. The Qur'an (610 AD to 632 AD), [68] the main holy book of Islam , had a significant influence on the Arab language, and marked the beginning of Islamic literature . Muslims believe it was transcribed in the Arabic dialect of the Quraysh , the tribe of Muhammad . [28] [69] As Islam spread, the Quran had the effect of unifying and standardizing Arabic. [28] Theological works in Latin were the dominant form of literature in Europe typically found in libraries during the Middle Ages . Western Vernacular literature includes the Poetic Edda and the sagas , or heroic epics, of Iceland, the Anglo-Saxon Beowulf , and the German Song of Hildebrandt . A later form of medieval fiction was the romance , an adventurous and sometimes magical narrative with strong popular appeal. [70] Controversial, religious, political and instructional literature proliferated during the European Renaissance as a result of the Johannes Gutenberg 's invention of the printing press [71] around 1440, while the Medieval romance developed into the novel. [72] Publishing[ edit ] The intricate frontispiece of the Diamond Sutra from Tang dynasty China, the world's earliest dated printed book, AD 868 ( British Library ) Publishing became possible with the invention of writing but became more practical with the invention of printing . Prior to printing, distributed works were copied manually, by scribes . The Chinese inventor Bi Sheng made movable type of earthenware c. 1045 and was spread to Korea later. Around 1230, Koreans invented a metal type movable printing. East metal movable type was spread to Europe between the late 14th century and early 15th century. [73] [74] [75] [76] In c. 1450, Johannes Gutenberg invented movable type in Europe. This invention gradually made books less expensive to produce and more widely available. Early printed books, single sheets, and images created before 1501 in Europe are known as incunables or incunabula. "A man born in 1453, the year of the fall of Constantinople, could look back from his fiftieth year on a lifetime in which about eight million books had been printed, more perhaps than all the scribes of Europe had produced since Constantine founded his city in A.D. 330." [77] Eventually, printing enabled other forms of publishing besides books. The history of newspaper publishing began in Germany in 1609, with the publishing of magazines following in 1663.
Toggle the table of contents Mathematics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Area of knowledge Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see Mathematics (disambiguation) and Math (disambiguation) . Part of a series on e Mathematics is an area of knowledge that includes the topics of numbers, formulas and related structures, shapes and the spaces in which they are contained, and quantities and their changes. These topics are represented in modern mathematics with the major subdisciplines of number theory , [1] algebra , [2] geometry , [1] and analysis , [3] respectively. There is no general consensus among mathematicians about a common definition for their academic discipline . Most mathematical activity involves the discovery of properties of abstract objects and the use of pure reason to prove them. These objects consist of either abstractions from nature or—in modern mathematics—entities that are stipulated to have certain properties, called axioms . A proof consists of a succession of applications of deductive rules to already established results. These results include previously proved theorems , axioms, and—in case of abstraction from nature—some basic properties that are considered true starting points of the theory under consideration. [4] Mathematics is essential in the natural sciences , engineering , medicine , finance , computer science , and the social sciences . Although mathematics is extensively used for modeling phenomena, the fundamental truths of mathematics are independent from any scientific experimentation. Some areas of mathematics, such as statistics and game theory , are developed in close correlation with their applications and are often grouped under applied mathematics . Other areas are developed independently from any application (and are therefore called pure mathematics ), but often later find practical applications. [5] [6] Historically, the concept of a proof and its associated mathematical rigour first appeared in Greek mathematics , most notably in Euclid's Elements . [7] Since its beginning, mathematics was primarily divided into geometry and arithmetic (the manipulation of natural numbers and fractions ), until the 16th and 17th centuries, when algebra [a] and infinitesimal calculus were introduced as new fields. Since then, the interaction between mathematical innovations and scientific discoveries has led to a correlated increase in the development of both. [8] At the end of the 19th century, the foundational crisis of mathematics led to the systematization of the axiomatic method , [9] which heralded a dramatic increase in the number of mathematical areas and their fields of application. The contemporary Mathematics Subject Classification lists more than sixty first-level areas of mathematics. Etymology The word mathematics comes from Ancient Greek máthēma ( μάθημα ), meaning "that which is learnt", [10] "what one gets to know", hence also "study" and "science". The word came to have the narrower and more technical meaning of "mathematical study" even in Classical times . [b] Its adjective is mathēmatikós (μαθηματικός), meaning "related to learning" or "studious", which likewise further came to mean "mathematical". [14] In particular, mathēmatikḗ tékhnē (μαθηματικὴ τέχνη; Latin : ars mathematica) meant "the mathematical art". [10] Similarly, one of the two main schools of thought in Pythagoreanism was known as the mathēmatikoi (μαθηματικοί)—which at the time meant "learners" rather than "mathematicians" in the modern sense. The Pythagoreans were likely the first to constrain the use of the word to just the study of arithmetic and geometry. By the time of Aristotle (384–322 BC) this meaning was fully established. [15] In Latin, and in English until around 1700, the term mathematics more commonly meant " astrology " (or sometimes " astronomy ") rather than "mathematics"; the meaning gradually changed to its present one from about 1500 to 1800. This change has resulted in several mistranslations: For example, Saint Augustine 's warning that Christians should beware of mathematici, meaning "astrologers", is sometimes mistranslated as a condemnation of mathematicians. [16] The apparent plural form in English goes back to the Latin neuter plural mathematica ( Cicero ), based on the Greek plural ta mathēmatiká (τὰ μαθηματικά) and means roughly "all things mathematical", although it is plausible that English borrowed only the adjective mathematic(al) and formed the noun mathematics anew, after the pattern of physics and metaphysics , inherited from Greek. [17] In English, the noun mathematics takes a singular verb. It is often shortened to maths [18] or, in North America, math. [19] Areas of mathematics Before the Renaissance , mathematics was divided into two main areas: arithmetic, regarding the manipulation of numbers, and geometry , regarding the study of shapes. [20] Some types of pseudoscience , such as numerology and astrology, were not then clearly distinguished from mathematics. [21] During the Renaissance, two more areas appeared. Mathematical notation led to algebra which, roughly speaking, consists of the study and the manipulation of formulas . Calculus , consisting of the two subfields differential calculus and integral calculus , is the study of continuous functions , which model the typically nonlinear relationships between varying quantities, as represented by variables . This division into four main areas–arithmetic, geometry, algebra, calculus [22] –endured until the end of the 19th century. Areas such as celestial mechanics and solid mechanics were then studied by mathematicians, but now are considered as belonging to physics. [23] The subject of combinatorics has been studied for much of recorded history, yet did not become a separate branch of mathematics until the seventeenth century. [24] At the end of the 19th century, the foundational crisis in mathematics and the resulting systematization of the axiomatic method led to an explosion of new areas of mathematics. [25] [9] The 2020 Mathematics Subject Classification contains no less than sixty-three first-level areas. [26] Some of these areas correspond to the older division, as is true regarding number theory (the modern name for higher arithmetic ) and geometry. Several other first-level areas have "geometry" in their names or are otherwise commonly considered part of geometry. Algebra and calculus do not appear as first-level areas but are respectively split into several first-level areas. Other first-level areas emerged during the 20th century or had not previously been considered as mathematics, such as mathematical logic and foundations . [27] Number theory Main article: Number theory This is the Ulam spiral , which illustrates the distribution of prime numbers . The dark diagonal lines in the spiral hint at the hypothesized approximate independence between being prime and being a value of a quadratic polynomial, a conjecture now known as Hardy and Littlewood's Conjecture F . Number theory began with the manipulation of numbers , that is, natural numbers ( and later expanded to integers ( . {\displaystyle (\mathbb {Q} ).} Number theory was once called arithmetic, but nowadays this term is mostly used for numerical calculations . [28] Number theory dates back to ancient Babylon and probably China . Two prominent early number theorists were Euclid of ancient Greece and Diophantus of Alexandria. [29] The modern study of number theory in its abstract form is largely attributed to Pierre de Fermat and Leonhard Euler . The field came to full fruition with the contributions of Adrien-Marie Legendre and Carl Friedrich Gauss . [30] Many easily stated number problems have solutions that require sophisticated methods, often from across mathematics. A prominent example is Fermat's Last Theorem . This conjecture was stated in 1637 by Pierre de Fermat, but it was proved only in 1994 by Andrew Wiles , who used tools including scheme theory from algebraic geometry , category theory , and homological algebra . [31] Another example is Goldbach's conjecture , which asserts that every even integer greater than 2 is the sum of two prime numbers . Stated in 1742 by Christian Goldbach , it remains unproven despite considerable effort. [32] Main article: Geometry On the surface of a sphere, Euclidean geometry only applies as a local approximation. For larger scales the sum of the angles of a triangle is not equal to 180°. Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics. It started with empirical recipes concerning shapes, such as lines , angles and circles , which were developed mainly for the needs of surveying and architecture , but has since blossomed out into many other subfields. [33] A fundamental innovation was the ancient Greeks' introduction of the concept of proofs , which require that every assertion must be proved. For example, it is not sufficient to verify by measurement that, say, two lengths are equal; their equality must be proven via reasoning from previously accepted results ( theorems ) and a few basic statements. The basic statements are not subject to proof because they are self-evident ( postulates ), or are part of the definition of the subject of study ( axioms ). This principle, foundational for all mathematics, was first elaborated for geometry, and was systematized by Euclid around 300 BC in his book Elements . [34] [35] The resulting Euclidean geometry is the study of shapes and their arrangements constructed from lines, planes and circles in the Euclidean plane ( plane geometry ) and the three-dimensional Euclidean space . [c] [33] Euclidean geometry was developed without change of methods or scope until the 17th century, when René Descartes introduced what is now called Cartesian coordinates . This constituted a major change of paradigm : Instead of defining real numbers as lengths of line segments (see number line ), it allowed the representation of points using their coordinates, which are numbers. Algebra (and later, calculus) can thus be used to solve geometrical problems. Geometry was split into two new subfields: synthetic geometry , which uses purely geometrical methods, and analytic geometry , which uses coordinates systemically. [36] Analytic geometry allows the study of curves unrelated to circles and lines. Such curves can be defined as the graph of functions , the study of which led to differential geometry . They can also be defined as implicit equations , often polynomial equations (which spawned algebraic geometry ). Analytic geometry also makes it possible to consider Euclidean spaces of higher than three dimensions. [33] In the 19th century, mathematicians discovered non-Euclidean geometries , which do not follow the parallel postulate . By questioning that postulate's truth, this discovery has been viewed as joining Russell's paradox in revealing the foundational crisis of mathematics . This aspect of the crisis was solved by systematizing the axiomatic method, and adopting that the truth of the chosen axioms is not a mathematical problem. [37] [9] In turn, the axiomatic method allows for the study of various geometries obtained either by changing the axioms or by considering properties that do not change under specific transformations of the space . [38] Today's subareas of geometry include: [27] Projective geometry , introduced in the 16th century by Girard Desargues , extends Euclidean geometry by adding points at infinity at which parallel lines intersect. This simplifies many aspects of classical geometry by unifying the treatments for intersecting and parallel lines. Affine geometry , the study of properties relative to parallelism and independent from the concept of length. Differential geometry , the study of curves, surfaces, and their generalizations, which are defined using differentiable functions . Manifold theory , the study of shapes that are not necessarily embedded in a larger space. Riemannian geometry , the study of distance properties in curved spaces. Algebraic geometry , the study of curves, surfaces, and their generalizations, which are defined using polynomials . Topology , the study of properties that are kept under continuous deformations . Algebraic topology , the use in topology of algebraic methods, mainly homological algebra . Discrete geometry , the study of finite configurations in geometry. Convex geometry , the study of convex sets , which takes its importance from its applications in optimization . Complex geometry , the geometry obtained by replacing real numbers with complex numbers . Algebra The Rubik's Cube group is a concrete application of group theory . [39] Algebra is the art of manipulating equations and formulas. Diophantus (3rd century) and al-Khwarizmi (9th century) were the two main precursors of algebra. [40] [41] Diophantus solved some equations involving unknown natural numbers by deducing new relations until he obtained the solution. Al-Khwarizmi introduced systematic methods for transforming equations, such as moving a term from one side of an equation into the other side. The term algebra is derived from the Arabic word al-jabr meaning 'the reunion of broken parts' [42] that he used for naming one of these methods in the title of his main treatise . Algebra became an area in its own right only with François Viète (1540–1603), who introduced the use of variables for representing unknown or unspecified numbers. [43] Variables allow mathematicians to describe the operations that have to be done on the numbers represented using mathematical formulas . Until the 19th century, algebra consisted mainly of the study of linear equations (presently linear algebra ), and polynomial equations in a single unknown , which were called algebraic equations (a term still in use, although it may be ambiguous). During the 19th century, mathematicians began to use variables to represent things other than numbers (such as matrices , modular integers , and geometric transformations ), on which generalizations of arithmetic operations are often valid. [44] The concept of algebraic structure addresses this, consisting of a set whose elements are unspecified, of operations acting on the elements of the set, and rules that these operations must follow. The scope of algebra thus grew to include the study of algebraic structures. This object of algebra was called modern algebra or abstract algebra , as established by the influence and works of Emmy Noether . [45] (The latter term appears mainly in an educational context, in opposition to elementary algebra , which is concerned with the older way of manipulating formulas.) Some types of algebraic structures have useful and often fundamental properties, in many areas of mathematics. Their study became autonomous parts of algebra, and include: [27] Lie algebra and Lie group theory; Boolean algebra , which is widely used for the study of the logical structure of computers . The study of types of algebraic structures as mathematical objects is the purpose of universal algebra and category theory . [46] The latter applies to every mathematical structure (not only algebraic ones). At its origin, it was introduced, together with homological algebra for allowing the algebraic study of non-algebraic objects such as topological spaces ; this particular area of application is called algebraic topology . [47] Calculus and analysis Main articles: Calculus and Mathematical analysis A Cauchy sequence consists of elements such that all subsequent terms of a term become arbitrarily close to each other as the sequence progresses (from left to right). Calculus, formerly called infinitesimal calculus, was introduced independently and simultaneously by 17th-century mathematicians Newton and Leibniz . [48] It is fundamentally the study of the relationship of variables that depend on each other. Calculus was expanded in the 18th century by Euler with the introduction of the concept of a function and many other results. [49] Presently, "calculus" refers mainly to the elementary part of this theory, and "analysis" is commonly used for advanced parts. Analysis is further subdivided into real analysis , where variables represent real numbers , and complex analysis , where variables represent complex numbers . Analysis includes many subareas shared by other areas of mathematics which include: [27] Numerical analysis , mainly devoted to the computation on computers of solutions of ordinary and partial differential equations that arise in many applications. Discrete mathematics Main article: Discrete mathematics A diagram representing a two-state Markov chain . The states are represented by 'A' and 'E'. The numbers are the probability of flipping the state. Discrete mathematics, broadly speaking, is the study of individual, countable mathematical objects. An example is the set of all integers. [50] Because the objects of study here are discrete, the methods of calculus and mathematical analysis do not directly apply. [d] Algorithms —especially their implementation and computational complexity —play a major role in discrete mathematics. [51] The four color theorem and optimal sphere packing were two major problems of discrete mathematics solved in the second half of the 20th century. [52] The P versus NP problem , which remains open to this day, is also important for discrete mathematics, since its solution would potentially impact a large number of computationally difficult problems. [53] Discrete mathematics includes: [27] Combinatorics , the art of enumerating mathematical objects that satisfy some given constraints. Originally, these objects were elements or subsets of a given set ; this has been extended to various objects, which establishes a strong link between combinatorics and other parts of discrete mathematics. For example, discrete geometry includes counting configurations of geometric shapes Main articles: Mathematical logic and Set theory The Venn diagram is a commonly used method to illustrate the relations between sets. The two subjects of mathematical logic and set theory have belonged to mathematics since the end of the 19th century. [54] [55] Before this period, sets were not considered to be mathematical objects, and logic , although used for mathematical proofs, belonged to philosophy and was not specifically studied by mathematicians. [56] Before Cantor 's study of infinite sets , mathematicians were reluctant to consider actually infinite collections, and considered infinity to be the result of endless enumeration . Cantor's work offended many mathematicians not only by considering actually infinite sets [57] but by showing that this implies different sizes of infinity, per Cantor's diagonal argument . This led to the controversy over Cantor's set theory . [58] In the same period, various areas of mathematics concluded the former intuitive definitions of the basic mathematical objects were insufficient for ensuring mathematical rigour . Examples of such intuitive definitions are "a set is a collection of objects", "natural number is what is used for counting", "a point is a shape with a zero length in every direction", "a curve is a trace left by a moving point", etc. This became the foundational crisis of mathematics. [59] It was eventually solved in mainstream mathematics by systematizing the axiomatic method inside a formalized set theory . Roughly speaking, each mathematical object is defined by the set of all similar objects and the properties that these objects must have. [25] For example, in Peano arithmetic , the natural numbers are defined by "zero is a number", "each number has a unique successor", "each number but zero has a unique predecessor", and some rules of reasoning. [60] This mathematical abstraction from reality is embodied in the modern philosophy of formalism , as founded by David Hilbert around 1910. [61] The "nature" of the objects defined this way is a philosophical problem that mathematicians leave to philosophers, even if many mathematicians have opinions on this nature, and use their opinion—sometimes called "intuition"—to guide their study and proofs. The approach allows considering "logics" (that is, sets of allowed deducing rules), theorems, proofs, etc. as mathematical objects, and to prove theorems about them. For example, Gödel's incompleteness theorems assert, roughly speaking that, in every consistent formal system that contains the natural numbers, there are theorems that are true (that is provable in a stronger system), but not provable inside the system. [62] This approach to the foundations of mathematics was challenged during the first half of the 20th century by mathematicians led by Brouwer , who promoted intuitionistic logic , which explicitly lacks the law of excluded middle . [63] [64] These problems and debates led to a wide expansion of mathematical logic, with subareas such as model theory (modeling some logical theories inside other theories), proof theory , type theory , computability theory and computational complexity theory . [27] Although these aspects of mathematical logic were introduced before the rise of computers , their use in compiler design, program certification , proof assistants and other aspects of computer science , contributed in turn to the expansion of these logical theories. [65] Statistics and other decision sciences Main articles: Statistics and Probability theory Whatever the form of a random population distribution (μ), the sampling mean (x̄) tends to a Gaussian distribution and its variance (σ) is given by the central limit theorem of probability theory. [66] The field of statistics is a mathematical application that is employed for the collection and processing of data samples, using procedures based on mathematical methods especially probability theory . Statisticians generate data with random sampling or randomized experiments . [67] The design of a statistical sample or experiment determines the analytical methods that will be used. Analysis of data from observational studies is done using statistical models and the theory of inference , using model selection and estimation . The models and consequential predictions should then be tested against new data . [e] Statistical theory studies decision problems such as minimizing the risk ( expected loss ) of a statistical action, such as using a procedure in, for example, parameter estimation , hypothesis testing , and selecting the best . In these traditional areas of mathematical statistics , a statistical-decision problem is formulated by minimizing an objective function , like expected loss or cost , under specific constraints. For example, designing a survey often involves minimizing the cost of estimating a population mean with a given level of confidence. [68] Because of its use of optimization , the mathematical theory of statistics overlaps with other decision sciences , such as operations research , control theory , and mathematical economics . [69] Computational mathematics Main article: Computational mathematics Computational mathematics is the study of mathematical problems that are typically too large for human, numerical capacity. [70] [71] Numerical analysis studies methods for problems in analysis using functional analysis and approximation theory ; numerical analysis broadly includes the study of approximation and discretization with special focus on rounding errors . [72] Numerical analysis and, more broadly, scientific computing also study non-analytic topics of mathematical science, especially algorithmic- matrix -and- graph theory . Other areas of computational mathematics include computer algebra and symbolic computation . History Main article: History of mathematics Ancient The history of mathematics is an ever-growing series of abstractions. Evolutionarily speaking, the first abstraction to ever be discovered, one shared by many animals, [73] was probably that of numbers: the realization that, for example, a collection of two apples and a collection of two oranges (say) have something in common, namely that there are two of them. As evidenced by tallies found on bone, in addition to recognizing how to count physical objects, prehistoric peoples may have also known how to count abstract quantities, like time—days, seasons, or years. [74] [75] The Babylonian mathematical tablet Plimpton 322 , dated to 1800 BC Evidence for more complex mathematics does not appear until around 3000 BC , when the Babylonians and Egyptians began using arithmetic, algebra, and geometry for taxation and other financial calculations, for building and construction, and for astronomy. [76] The oldest mathematical texts from Mesopotamia and Egypt are from 2000 to 1800 BC. Many early texts mention Pythagorean triples and so, by inference, the Pythagorean theorem seems to be the most ancient and widespread mathematical concept after basic arithmetic and geometry. It is in Babylonian mathematics that elementary arithmetic ( addition , subtraction , multiplication , and division ) first appear in the archaeological record. The Babylonians also possessed a place-value system and used a sexagesimal numeral system which is still in use today for measuring angles and time. [77] In the 6th century BC, Greek mathematics began to emerge as a distinct discipline and some Ancient Greeks such as the Pythagoreans appeared to have considered it a subject in its own right. [78] Around 300 BC, Euclid organized mathematical knowledge by way of postulates and first principles, which evolved into the axiomatic method that is used in mathematics today, consisting of definition, axiom, theorem, and proof. [79] His book, Elements , is widely considered the most successful and influential textbook of all time. [80] The greatest mathematician of antiquity is often held to be Archimedes ( c. 287 – c. 212 BC) of Syracuse . [81] He developed formulas for calculating the surface area and volume of solids of revolution and used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series , in a manner not too dissimilar from modern calculus. [82] Other notable achievements of Greek mathematics are conic sections ( Apollonius of Perga , 3rd century BC), [83] trigonometry ( Hipparchus of Nicaea , 2nd century BC), [84] and the beginnings of algebra (Diophantus, 3rd century AD). [85] The numerals used in the Bakhshali manuscript , dated between the 2nd century BC and the 2nd century AD The Hindu–Arabic numeral system and the rules for the use of its operations, in use throughout the world today, evolved over the course of the first millennium AD in India and were transmitted to the Western world via Islamic mathematics . [86] Other notable developments of Indian mathematics include the modern definition and approximation of sine and cosine , and an early form of infinite series . [87] [88] Medieval and later A page from al-Khwārizmī's Algebra During the Golden Age of Islam , especially during the 9th and 10th centuries, mathematics saw many important innovations building on Greek mathematics. The most notable achievement of Islamic mathematics was the development of algebra. Other achievements of the Islamic period include advances in spherical trigonometry and the addition of the decimal point to the Arabic numeral system. [89] Many notable mathematicians from this period were Persian, such as Al-Khwarismi, Omar Khayyam and Sharaf al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī . [90] The Greek and Arabic mathematical texts were in turn translated to Latin during the Middle Ages and made available in Europe. [91] During the early modern period , mathematics began to develop at an accelerating pace in Western Europe , with innovations that revolutionized mathematics, such as the introduction of variables and symbolic notation by François Viète (1540–1603), the introduction of logarithms by John Napier in 1614, which greatly simplified numerical calculations, especially for astronomy and marine navigation , the introduction of coordinates by René Descartes (1596–1650) for reducing geometry to algebra, and the development of calculus by Isaac Newton (1642–1726/27) and Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716). Leonhard Euler (1707–1783), the most notable mathematician of the 18th century, unified these innovations into a single corpus with a standardized terminology, and completed them with the discovery and the proof of numerous theorems. Carl Friedrich Gauss Perhaps the foremost mathematician of the 19th century was the German mathematician Carl Gauss, who made numerous contributions to fields such as algebra, analysis, differential geometry , matrix theory , number theory, and statistics . [92] In the early 20th century, Kurt Gödel transformed mathematics by publishing his incompleteness theorems, which show in part that any consistent axiomatic system—if powerful enough to describe arithmetic—will contain true propositions that cannot be proved. [62] Mathematics has since been greatly extended, and there has been a fruitful interaction between mathematics and science , to the benefit of both. Mathematical discoveries continue to be made to this very day. According to Mikhail B. Sevryuk, in the January 2006 issue of the Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society , "The number of papers and books included in the Mathematical Reviews database since 1940 (the first year of operation of MR) is now more than 1.9 million, and more than 75 thousand items are added to the database each year. The overwhelming majority of works in this ocean contain new mathematical theorems and their proofs." [93] Symbolic notation and terminology Main articles: Mathematical notation , Language of mathematics , and Glossary of mathematics An explanation of the sigma (Σ) summation notation Mathematical notation is widely used in science and engineering for representing complex concepts and properties in a concise, unambiguous, and accurate way. This notation consists of symbols used for representing operations , unspecified numbers, relations and any other mathematical objects, and then assembling them into expressions and formulas. [94] More precisely, numbers and other mathematical objects are represented by symbols called variables, which are generally Latin or Greek letters, and often include subscripts . Operation and relations are generally represented by specific symbols or glyphs , [95] such as + ( plus ), × ( multiplication ), {\textstyle \int } ( integral ), = ( equal ), and < ( less than ). [96] All these symbols are generally grouped according to specific rules to form expressions and formulas. [97] Normally, expressions and formulas do not appear alone, but are included in sentences of the current language, where expressions play the role of noun phrases and formulas play the role of clauses . Mathematics has developed a rich terminology covering a broad range of fields that study the properties of various abstract, idealized objects and how they interact. It is based on rigorous definitions that provide a standard foundation for communication. An axiom or postulate is a mathematical statement that is taken to be true without need of proof. If a mathematical statement has yet to be proven (or disproven), it is termed a conjecture . Through a series of rigorous arguments employing deductive reasoning , a statement that is proven to be true becomes a theorem. A specialized theorem that is mainly used to prove another theorem is called a lemma . A proven instance that forms part of a more general finding is termed a corollary . [98] Numerous technical terms used in mathematics are neologisms , such as polynomial and homeomorphism . [99] Other technical terms are words of the common language that are used in an accurate meaning that may differ slightly from their common meaning. For example, in mathematics, " or " means "one, the other or both", while, in common language, it is either ambiguous or means "one or the other but not both" (in mathematics, the latter is called " exclusive or "). Finally, many mathematical terms are common words that are used with a completely different meaning. [100] This may lead to sentences that are correct and true mathematical assertions, but appear to be nonsense to people who do not have the required background. For example, "every free module is flat " and "a field is always a ring ". Relationship with sciences Mathematics is used in most sciences for modeling phenomena, which then allows predictions to be made from experimental laws. [101] The independence of mathematical truth from any experimentation implies that the accuracy of such predictions depends only on the adequacy of the model. [102] Inaccurate predictions, rather than being caused by invalid mathematical concepts, imply the need to change the mathematical model used. [103] For example, the perihelion precession of Mercury could only be explained after the emergence of Einstein 's general relativity , which replaced Newton's law of gravitation as a better mathematical model. [104] There is still a philosophical debate whether mathematics is a science. However, in practice, mathematicians are typically grouped with scientists, and mathematics shares much in common with the physical sciences. Like them, it is falsifiable , which means in mathematics that, if a result or a theory is wrong, this can be proved by providing a counterexample . Similarly as in science, theories and results (theorems) are often obtained from experimentation . [105] In mathematics, the experimentation may consist of computation on selected examples or of the study of figures or other representations of mathematical objects (often mind representations without physical support). For example, when asked how he came about his theorems, Gauss once replied "durch planmässiges Tattonieren" (through systematic experimentation). [106] However, some authors emphasize that mathematics differs from the modern notion of science by not relying on empirical evidence. [107] [108] [109] [110] Pure and applied mathematics Main articles: Applied mathematics and Pure mathematics Isaac Newton (left) and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz developed infinitesimal calculus. Until the 19th century, the development of mathematics in the West was mainly motivated by the needs of technology and science, and there was no clear distinction between pure and applied mathematics. [111] For example, the natural numbers and arithmetic were introduced for the need of counting, and geometry was motivated by surveying, architecture and astronomy. Later, Isaac Newton introduced infinitesimal calculus for explaining the movement of the planets with his law of gravitation. Moreover, most mathematicians were also scientists, and many scientists were also mathematicians. [112] However, a notable exception occurred with the tradition of pure mathematics in Ancient Greece . [113] The problem of integer factorization , for example, which goes back to Euclid in 300 BC, had no practical application before its use in the RSA cryptosystem , now widely used for the security of computer networks . [114] In the 19th century, mathematicians such as Karl Weierstrass and Richard Dedekind increasingly focused their research on internal problems, that is, pure mathematics. [111] [115] This led to split mathematics into pure mathematics and applied mathematics, the latter being often considered as having a lower value among mathematical purists. However, the lines between the two are frequently blurred. [116] The aftermath of World War II led to a surge in the development of applied mathematics in the US and elsewhere. [117] [118] Many of the theories developed for applications were found interesting from the point of view of pure mathematics, and many results of pure mathematics were shown to have applications outside mathematics; in turn, the study of these applications may give new insights on the "pure theory". [119] [120] An example of the first case is the theory of distributions , introduced by Laurent Schwartz for validating computations done in quantum mechanics , which became immediately an important tool of (pure) mathematical analysis. [121] An example of the second case is the decidability of the first-order theory of the real numbers , a problem of pure mathematics that was proved true by Alfred Tarski , with an algorithm that is impossible to implement because of a computational complexity that is much too high. [122] For getting an algorithm that can be implemented and can solve systems of polynomial equations and inequalities, George Collins introduced the cylindrical algebraic decomposition that became a fundamental tool in real algebraic geometry . [123] In the present day, the distinction between pure and applied mathematics is more a question of personal research aim of mathematicians than a division of mathematics into broad areas. [124] [125] The Mathematics Subject Classification has a section for "general applied mathematics" but does not mention "pure mathematics". [27] However, these terms are still used in names of some university departments, such as at the Faculty of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge . Unreasonable effectiveness The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics is a phenomenon that was named and first made explicit by physicist Eugene Wigner . [6] It is the fact that many mathematical theories (even the "purest") have applications outside their initial object. These applications may be completely outside their initial area of mathematics, and may concern physical phenomena that were completely unknown when the mathematical theory was introduced. [126] Examples of unexpected applications of mathematical theories can be found in many areas of mathematics. A notable example is the prime factorization of natural numbers that was discovered more than 2,000 years before its common use for secure internet communications through the RSA cryptosystem . [127] A second historical example is the theory of ellipses . They were studied by the ancient Greek mathematicians as conic sections (that is, intersections of cones with planes). It is almost 2,000 years later that Johannes Kepler discovered that the trajectories of the planets are ellipses. [128] In the 19th century, the internal development of geometry (pure mathematics) led to definition and study of non-Euclidean geometries, spaces of dimension higher than three and manifolds . At this time, these concepts seemed totally disconnected from the physical reality, but at the beginning of the 20th century, Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity that uses fundamentally these concepts. In particular, spacetime of special relativity is a non-Euclidean space of dimension four, and spacetime of general relativity is a (curved) manifold of dimension four. [129] [130] A striking aspect of the interaction between mathematics and physics is when mathematics drives research in physics. This is illustrated by the discoveries of the positron and the baryon Ω . {\displaystyle \Omega ^{-}.} In both cases, the equations of the theories had unexplained solutions, which led to conjecture of the existence of an unknown particle , and the search for these particles. In both cases, these particles were discovered a few years later by specific experiments. [131] [132] [133] Specific sciences This subsection is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style . (December 2022) (
e Physics is the natural science of matter , involving the study of matter, [a] its fundamental constituents , its motion and behavior through space and time , and the related entities of energy and force . [2] Physics is one of the most fundamental scientific disciplines, with its main goal being to understand how the universe behaves. [b] [3] [4] [5] A scientist who specializes in the field of physics is called a physicist . Physics is one of the oldest academic disciplines and, through its inclusion of astronomy , perhaps the oldest. [6] Over much of the past two millennia, physics, chemistry , biology , and certain branches of mathematics were a part of natural philosophy , but during the Scientific Revolution in the 17th century these natural sciences emerged as unique research endeavors in their own right. [c] Physics intersects with many interdisciplinary areas of research, such as biophysics and quantum chemistry , and the boundaries of physics are not rigidly defined. New ideas in physics often explain the fundamental mechanisms studied by other sciences [3] and suggest new avenues of research in these and other academic disciplines such as mathematics and philosophy. Advances in physics often enable new technologies . For example, advances in the understanding of electromagnetism , solid-state physics , and nuclear physics led directly to the development of new products that have dramatically transformed modern-day society, such as television, computers, domestic appliances , and nuclear weapons ; [3] advances in thermodynamics led to the development of industrialization; and advances in mechanics inspired the development of calculus . The expansion of the universe according to the Big Bang theory in physics History The word physics comes from the Latin physica ('study of nature'), which itself is a borrowing of the Greek φυσική (phusikḗ 'natural science'), a term derived from φύσις (phúsis 'origin, nature, property'). [8] [9] [10] Ancient astronomy Ancient Egyptian astronomy is evident in monuments like the ceiling of Senemut's tomb from the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt . Astronomy is one of the oldest natural sciences . Early civilizations dating before 3000 BCE, such as the Sumerians , ancient Egyptians , and the Indus Valley Civilisation , had a predictive knowledge and a basic awareness of the motions of the Sun, Moon, and stars. The stars and planets, believed to represent gods, were often worshipped. While the explanations for the observed positions of the stars were often unscientific and lacking in evidence, these early observations laid the foundation for later astronomy, as the stars were found to traverse great circles across the sky, [6] which could not explain the positions of the planets . According to Asger Aaboe , the origins of Western astronomy can be found in Mesopotamia , and all Western efforts in the exact sciences are descended from late Babylonian astronomy . [11] Egyptian astronomers left monuments showing knowledge of the constellations and the motions of the celestial bodies, [12] while Greek poet Homer wrote of various celestial objects in his Iliad and Odyssey ; later Greek astronomers provided names, which are still used today, for most constellations visible from the Northern Hemisphere . [13] Natural philosophy Main article: Natural philosophy Natural philosophy has its origins in Greece during the Archaic period (650 BCE – 480 BCE), when pre-Socratic philosophers like Thales rejected non-naturalistic explanations for natural phenomena and proclaimed that every event had a natural cause. [14] They proposed ideas verified by reason and observation, and many of their hypotheses proved successful in experiment; [15] for example, atomism was found to be correct approximately 2000 years after it was proposed by Leucippus and his pupil Democritus . [16] Medieval European and Islamic Main articles: European science in the Middle Ages and Physics in the medieval Islamic world The Western Roman Empire fell in the fifth century, and this resulted in a decline in intellectual pursuits in the western part of Europe. By contrast, the Eastern Roman Empire (usually known as the Byzantine Empire ) resisted the attacks from the barbarians, and continued to advance various fields of learning, including physics. [17] In the sixth century, Isidore of Miletus created an important compilation of Archimedes ' works that are copied in the Archimedes Palimpsest . Ibn al-Haytham ( c. 965 – c. 1040) wrote of his camera obscura experiments in the Book of Optics. [18] In sixth-century Europe John Philoponus , a Byzantine scholar, questioned Aristotle 's teaching of physics and noted its flaws. He introduced the theory of impetus . Aristotle's physics was not scrutinized until Philoponus appeared; unlike Aristotle, who based his physics on verbal argument, Philoponus relied on observation. On Aristotle's physics Philoponus wrote: But this is completely erroneous, and our view may be corroborated by actual observation more effectively than by any sort of verbal argument. For if you let fall from the same height two weights of which one is many times as heavy as the other, you will see that the ratio of the times required for the motion does not depend on the ratio of the weights, but that the difference in time is a very small one. And so, if the difference in the weights is not considerable, that is, of one is, let us say, double the other, there will be no difference, or else an imperceptible difference, in time, though the difference in weight is by no means negligible, with one body weighing twice as much as the other [19] Philoponus' criticism of Aristotelian principles of physics served as an inspiration for Galileo Galilei ten centuries later, [20] during the Scientific Revolution . Galileo cited Philoponus substantially in his works when arguing that Aristotelian physics was flawed. [21] [22] In the 1300s Jean Buridan , a teacher in the faculty of arts at the University of Paris , developed the concept of impetus. It was a step toward the modern ideas of inertia and momentum. [23] Islamic scholarship inherited Aristotelian physics from the Greeks and during the Islamic Golden Age developed it further, especially placing emphasis on observation and a priori reasoning, developing early forms of the scientific method . Although Aristotle's principles of physics was criticized, it is important to identify the evidence off of which he based his views. When thinking of the history of science and math, it is notable to acknowledge the contributions made by older scientists. Aristotle's science was the backbone of the science taught in schools today. Aristotle published many biological works including The Parts of Animals , in which he discusses both biological science and natural science as well. It is also integral to mention the role Aristotle had in the progression of physics and metaphysics and how his beliefs and findings are still taught in science classes today. The explanations that Aristotle gives for his findings are also simple. When thinking of the elements, Aristotle believed that each element (earth, fire, water, air) had its own natural place. [24] Meaning that because of the density of these elements, they will revert to their own specific place in the atmosphere. [25] So, because of their weights, fire would be at the top, air underneath fire, then water, then lastly earth. He also stated that when a small amount of one element enters the natural place of another, the less abundant element will automatically go into its own natural place. For example, if there is a fire on the ground, the flames go up into the air as an attempt to go back into its natural place where it belongs. Aristotle called his metaphysics "first philosophy" and characterized it as the study of "being as being". [26] Aristotle defined the paradigm of motion as a being or entity encompassing different areas in the same body. [26] Meaning that if a person is at a location (A) they can move to a new location (B) and still take up the same amount of space. This is involved with Aristotle's belief that motion is a continuum. In terms of matter, Aristotle believed that the change in category (e.g. place) and quality (e.g. color) of an object is defined as "alteration". But, a change in substance is a change in matter. This is also similar to the idea of matter today. He also devised his own laws of motion that include 1) heavier objects will fall faster, the speed being proportional to the weight and 2) the speed of the object that is falling depends inversely on the density object it is falling through (e.g. density of air). [27] He also stated that, when it comes to violent motion (motion of an object when a force is applied to it by a second object) that the speed that object moves, will only be as fast or strong as the measure of force applied to it. [27] This is also seen in the rules of velocity and force that is taught in physics classes today. These rules are not necessarily what is described in physics today but, they are mostly similar. It is evident that these rules were the backbone for other scientists to revise and edit his beliefs. The basic way a pinhole camera works The most notable innovations under Islamic scholarship were in the field of optics and vision, [28] which came from the works of many scientists like Ibn Sahl , Al-Kindi , Ibn al-Haytham , Al-Farisi and Avicenna . The most notable work was The Book of Optics (also known as Kitāb al-Manāẓir), written by Ibn al-Haytham, in which he presented the alternative to the ancient Greek idea about vision.[ citation needed ] In his Treatise on Light as well as in his Kitāb al-Manāẓir, he presented a study of the phenomenon of the camera obscura (his thousand-year-old version of the pinhole camera ) and delved further into the way the eye itself works. Using the knowledge of previous scholars, he began to explain how light enters the eye. He asserted that the light ray is focused, but the actual explanation of how light projected to the back of the eye had to wait until 1604. His Treatise on Light explained the camera obscura, hundreds of years before the modern development of photography. [29] The seven-volume Book of Optics (Kitab al-Manathir) influenced thinking[ citation needed ] across disciplines from the theory of visual perception to the nature of perspective in medieval art, in both the East and the West, for more than 600 years. This included later European scholars and fellow polymaths, from Robert Grosseteste and Leonardo da Vinci to Johannes Kepler . The translation of The Book of Optics had an impact on Europe. From it, later European scholars were able to build devices that replicated those Ibn al-Haytham had built and understand the way vision works. Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) related mathematics, theoretical physics, and experimental physics. Classical Isaac Newton discovered the laws of motion and universal gravitation Physics became a separate science when early modern Europeans used experimental and quantitative methods to discover what are now considered to be the laws of physics . [30] [ page needed ] Major developments in this period include the replacement of the geocentric model of the Solar System with the heliocentric Copernican model , the laws governing the motion of planetary bodies (determined by Kepler between 1609 and 1619), Galileo's pioneering work on telescopes and observational astronomy in the 16th and 17th centuries, and Isaac Newton 's discovery and unification of the laws of motion and universal gravitation (that would come to bear his name). [31] Newton also developed calculus , [d] the mathematical study of continuous change, which provided new mathematical methods for solving physical problems. [32] The discovery of laws in thermodynamics , chemistry , and electromagnetics resulted from research efforts during the Industrial Revolution as energy needs increased. [33] The laws comprising classical physics remain widely used for objects on everyday scales travelling at non-relativistic speeds, since they provide a close approximation in such situations, and theories such as quantum mechanics and the theory of relativity simplify to their classical equivalents at such scales. Inaccuracies in classical mechanics for very small objects and very high velocities led to the development of modern physics in the 20th century. Modern
Toggle the table of contents Chemistry From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific field of study For other uses, see Chemistry (disambiguation) . "Chemical science" redirects here. For the journal, see Chemical Science (journal) . Not to be confused with Kemistry . Part of a series on Chemistry is the scientific study of the properties and behavior of matter . [1] It is a physical science within the natural sciences that studies the chemical elements that make up matter and compounds made of atoms , molecules and ions : their composition, structure, properties, behavior and the changes they undergo during reactions with other substances . [2] [3] [4] [5] Chemistry also addresses the nature of chemical bonds in chemical compounds . In the scope of its subject, chemistry occupies an intermediate position between physics and biology . [6] It is sometimes called the central science because it provides a foundation for understanding both basic and applied scientific disciplines at a fundamental level. [7] For example, chemistry explains aspects of plant growth ( botany ), the formation of igneous rocks ( geology ), how atmospheric ozone is formed and how environmental pollutants are degraded ( ecology ), the properties of the soil on the Moon ( cosmochemistry ), how medications work ( pharmacology ), and how to collect DNA evidence at a crime scene ( forensics ). Chemistry has existed under various names since ancient times. [8] It has evolved, and now chemistry encompasses various areas of specialisation, or subdisciplines, that continue to increase in number and interrelate to create further interdisciplinary fields of study. The applications of various fields of chemistry are used frequently for economic purposes in the chemical industry . Etymology Main article: Etymology of chemistry The word chemistry comes from a modification during the Renaissance of the word alchemy , which referred to an earlier set of practices that encompassed elements of chemistry, metallurgy , philosophy , astrology , astronomy , mysticism , and medicine . Alchemy is often associated with the quest to turn lead or other base metals into gold, though alchemists were also interested in many of the questions of modern chemistry. [9] The modern word alchemy in turn is derived from the Arabic word al-kīmīā (الكیمیاء). This may have Egyptian origins since al-kīmīā is derived from the Ancient Greek χημία, which is in turn derived from the word Kemet , which is the ancient name of Egypt in the Egyptian language. [10] Alternately, al-kīmīā may derive from χημεία 'cast together'. [11] Modern principles Laboratory , Institute of Biochemistry, University of Cologne in Germany The current model of atomic structure is the quantum mechanical model . [12] Traditional chemistry starts with the study of elementary particles , atoms , molecules , [13] substances , metals , crystals and other aggregates of matter . Matter can be studied in solid, liquid, gas and plasma states , in isolation or in combination. The interactions, reactions and transformations that are studied in chemistry are usually the result of interactions between atoms, leading to rearrangements of the chemical bonds which hold atoms together. Such behaviors are studied in a chemistry laboratory . The chemistry laboratory stereotypically uses various forms of laboratory glassware . However glassware is not central to chemistry, and a great deal of experimental (as well as applied/industrial) chemistry is done without it. Solutions of substances in reagent bottles, including ammonium hydroxide and nitric acid , illuminated in different colors A chemical reaction is a transformation of some substances into one or more different substances. [14] The basis of such a chemical transformation is the rearrangement of electrons in the chemical bonds between atoms. It can be symbolically depicted through a chemical equation , which usually involves atoms as subjects. The number of atoms on the left and the right in the equation for a chemical transformation is equal. (When the number of atoms on either side is unequal, the transformation is referred to as a nuclear reaction or radioactive decay .) The type of chemical reactions a substance may undergo and the energy changes that may accompany it are constrained by certain basic rules, known as chemical laws . Energy and entropy considerations are invariably important in almost all chemical studies. Chemical substances are classified in terms of their structure , phase, as well as their chemical compositions . They can be analyzed using the tools of chemical analysis , e.g. spectroscopy and chromatography . Scientists engaged in chemical research are known as chemists . [15] Most chemists specialize in one or more sub-disciplines. Several concepts are essential for the study of chemistry; some of them are: [16] Matter Main article: Matter In chemistry, matter is defined as anything that has rest mass and volume (it takes up space) and is made up of particles . The particles that make up matter have rest mass as well – not all particles have rest mass, such as the photon . Matter can be a pure chemical substance or a mixture of substances. [17] Atom Main article: Atom A diagram of an atom based on the Rutherford model The atom is the basic unit of chemistry. It consists of a dense core called the atomic nucleus surrounded by a space occupied by an electron cloud . The nucleus is made up of positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons (together called nucleons ), while the electron cloud consists of negatively charged electrons which orbit the nucleus. In a neutral atom, the negatively charged electrons balance out the positive charge of the protons. The nucleus is dense; the mass of a nucleon is approximately 1,836 times that of an electron, yet the radius of an atom is about 10,000 times that of its nucleus. [18] [19] The atom is also the smallest entity that can be envisaged to retain the chemical properties of the element, such as electronegativity , ionization potential , preferred oxidation state (s), coordination number , and preferred types of bonds to form (e.g., metallic , ionic , covalent ). Element Main article: Chemical element A chemical element is a pure substance which is composed of a single type of atom, characterized by its particular number of protons in the nuclei of its atoms, known as the atomic number and represented by the symbol Z. The mass number is the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in a nucleus. Although all the nuclei of all atoms belonging to one element will have the same atomic number, they may not necessarily have the same mass number; atoms of an element which have different mass numbers are known as isotopes . For example, all atoms with 6 protons in their nuclei are atoms of the chemical element carbon , but atoms of carbon may have mass numbers of 12 or 13. [19] The standard presentation of the chemical elements is in the periodic table , which orders elements by atomic number. The periodic table is arranged in groups , or columns, and periods , or rows. The periodic table is useful in identifying periodic trends . [20] Compound Main article: Chemical compound A compound is a pure chemical substance composed of more than one element. The properties of a compound bear little similarity to those of its elements. [21] The standard nomenclature of compounds is set by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). Organic compounds are named according to the organic nomenclature system. [22] The names for inorganic compounds are created according to the inorganic nomenclature system. When a compound has more than one component, then they are divided into two classes, the electropositive and the electronegative components. [23] In addition the Chemical Abstracts Service has devised a method to index chemical substances. In this scheme each chemical substance is identifiable by a number known as its CAS registry number . Molecule Main article: Molecule A ball-and-stick representation of the caffeine molecule (C8H10N4O2) A molecule is the smallest indivisible portion of a pure chemical substance that has its unique set of chemical properties, that is, its potential to undergo a certain set of chemical reactions with other substances. However, this definition only works well for substances that are composed of molecules, which is not true of many substances (see below). Molecules are typically a set of atoms bound together by covalent bonds , such that the structure is electrically neutral and all valence electrons are paired with other electrons either in bonds or in lone pairs . Thus, molecules exist as electrically neutral units, unlike ions. When this rule is broken, giving the "molecule" a charge, the result is sometimes named a molecular ion or a polyatomic ion. However, the discrete and separate nature of the molecular concept usually requires that molecular ions be present only in well-separated form, such as a directed beam in a vacuum in a mass spectrometer . Charged polyatomic collections residing in solids (for example, common sulfate or nitrate ions) are generally not considered "molecules" in chemistry. Some molecules contain one or more unpaired electrons, creating radicals . Most radicals are comparatively reactive, but some, such as nitric oxide (NO) can be stable. A 2-D structural formula of a benzene molecule (C6H6) The "inert" or noble gas elements ( helium , neon , argon , krypton , xenon and radon ) are composed of lone atoms as their smallest discrete unit, but the other isolated chemical elements consist of either molecules or networks of atoms bonded to each other in some way. Identifiable molecules compose familiar substances such as water, air, and many organic compounds like alcohol, sugar, gasoline, and the various pharmaceuticals . However, not all substances or chemical compounds consist of discrete molecules, and indeed most of the solid substances that make up the solid crust, mantle, and core of the Earth are chemical compounds without molecules. These other types of substances, such as ionic compounds and network solids , are organized in such a way as to lack the existence of identifiable molecules per se. Instead, these substances are discussed in terms of formula units or unit cells as the smallest repeating structure within the substance. Examples of such substances are mineral salts (such as table salt ), solids like carbon and diamond, metals, and familiar silica and silicate minerals such as quartz and granite. One of the main characteristics of a molecule is its geometry often called its structure . While the structure of diatomic, triatomic or tetra-atomic molecules may be trivial, (linear, angular pyramidal etc.) the structure of polyatomic molecules, that are constituted of more than six atoms (of several elements) can be crucial for its chemical nature. Substance and mixture Examples of pure chemical substances. From left to right: the elements tin (Sn) and sulfur (S), diamond (an allotrope of carbon ), sucrose (pure sugar), and sodium chloride (salt) and sodium bicarbonate (baking soda), which are both ionic compounds. A chemical substance is a kind of matter with a definite composition and set of properties . [24] A collection of substances is called a mixture. Examples of mixtures are air and alloys . [25] Mole and amount of substance Main article: Mole The mole is a unit of measurement that denotes an amount of substance (also called chemical amount). One mole is defined to contain exactly 6.02214076×1023 particles ( atoms , molecules , ions , or electrons ), where the number of particles per mole is known as the Avogadro constant . [26] Molar concentration is the amount of a particular substance per volume of solution , and is commonly reported in mol/ dm 3. [27] Phase Main article: Phase In addition to the specific chemical properties that distinguish different chemical classifications, chemicals can exist in several phases. For the most part, the chemical classifications are independent of these bulk phase classifications; however, some more exotic phases are incompatible with certain chemical properties. A phase is a set of states of a chemical system that have similar bulk structural properties, over a range of conditions, such as pressure or temperature . Physical properties, such as density and refractive index tend to fall within values characteristic of the phase. The phase of matter is defined by the phase transition , which is when energy put into or taken out of the system goes into rearranging the structure of the system, instead of changing the bulk conditions. Sometimes the distinction between phases can be continuous instead of having a discrete boundary' in this case the matter is considered to be in a supercritical state. When three states meet based on the conditions, it is known as a triple point and since this is invariant, it is a convenient way to define a set of conditions. The most familiar examples of phases are solids , liquids , and gases . Many substances exhibit multiple solid phases. For example, there are three phases of solid iron (alpha, gamma, and delta) that vary based on temperature and pressure. A principal difference between solid phases is the crystal structure , or arrangement, of the atoms. Another phase commonly encountered in the study of chemistry is the aqueous phase, which is the state of substances dissolved in aqueous solution (that is, in water). Less familiar phases include plasmas , Bose–Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates and the paramagnetic and ferromagnetic phases of magnetic materials. While most familiar phases deal with three-dimensional systems, it is also possible to define analogs in two-dimensional systems, which has received attention for its relevance to systems in biology . Bonding Main article: Chemical bond An animation of the process of ionic bonding between sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl) to form sodium chloride , or common table salt. Ionic bonding involves one atom taking valence electrons from another (as opposed to sharing, which occurs in covalent bonding). Atoms sticking together in molecules or crystals are said to be bonded with one another. A chemical bond may be visualized as the multipole balance between the positive charges in the nuclei and the negative charges oscillating about them. [28] More than simple attraction and repulsion, the energies and distributions characterize the availability of an electron to bond to another atom. The chemical bond can be a covalent bond , an ionic bond , a hydrogen bond or just because of Van der Waals force . Each of these kinds of bonds is ascribed to some potential. These potentials create the interactions which hold atoms together in molecules or crystals . In many simple compounds, valence bond theory , the Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion model ( VSEPR ), and the concept of oxidation number can be used to explain molecular structure and composition. An ionic bond is formed when a metal loses one or more of its electrons, becoming a positively charged cation, and the electrons are then gained by the non-metal atom, becoming a negatively charged anion. The two oppositely charged ions attract one another, and the ionic bond is the electrostatic force of attraction between them. For example, sodium (Na), a metal, loses one electron to become an Na+ cation while chlorine (Cl), a non-metal, gains this electron to become Cl−. The ions are held together due to electrostatic attraction, and that compound sodium chloride (NaCl), or common table salt, is formed. In the methane molecule (CH4), the carbon atom shares a pair of valence electrons with each of the four hydrogen atoms. Thus, the octet rule is satisfied for C-atom (it has eight electrons in its valence shell) and the duet rule is satisfied for the H-atoms (they have two electrons in their valence shells). In a covalent bond, one or more pairs of valence electrons are shared by two atoms: the resulting electrically neutral group of bonded atoms is termed a molecule . Atoms will share valence electrons in such a way as to create a noble gas electron configuration (eight electrons in their outermost shell) for each atom. Atoms that tend to combine in such a way that they each have eight electrons in their valence shell are said to follow the octet rule . However, some elements like hydrogen and lithium need only two electrons in their outermost shell to attain this stable configuration; these atoms are said to follow the duet rule, and in this way they are reaching the electron configuration of the noble gas helium , which has two electrons in its outer shell. Similarly, theories from classical physics can be used to predict many ionic structures. With more complicated compounds, such as metal complexes , valence bond theory is less applicable and alternative approaches, such as the molecular orbital theory, are generally used. See diagram on electronic orbitals. Energy Main article: Energy In the context of chemistry, energy is an attribute of a substance as a consequence of its atomic , molecular or aggregate structure . Since a chemical transformation is accompanied by a change in one or more of these kinds of structures, it is invariably accompanied by an increase or decrease of energy of the substances involved. Some energy is transferred between the surroundings and the reactants of the reaction in the form of heat or light ; thus the products of a reaction may have more or less energy than the reactants. A reaction is said to be exergonic if the final state is lower on the energy scale than the initial state; in the case of endergonic reactions the situation is the reverse. A reaction is said to be exothermic if the reaction releases heat to the surroundings; in the case of endothermic reactions , the reaction absorbs heat from the surroundings. Chemical reactions are invariably not possible unless the reactants surmount an energy barrier known as the activation energy . The speed of a chemical reaction (at given temperature T) is related to the activation energy E, by the Boltzmann's population factor e
e Biology is the scientific study of life. [1] [2] [3] It is a natural science with a broad scope but has several unifying themes that tie it together as a single, coherent field. [1] [2] [3] For instance, all organisms are made up of cells that process hereditary information encoded in genes , which can be transmitted to future generations. Another major theme is evolution , which explains the unity and diversity of life. [1] [2] [3] Energy processing is also important to life as it allows organisms to move , grow, and reproduce . [1] [2] [3] Finally, all organisms are able to regulate their own internal environments . [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] Biologists are able to study life at multiple levels of organization , [1] from the molecular biology of a cell to the anatomy and physiology of plants and animals, and evolution of populations. [1] [6] Hence, there are multiple subdisciplines within biology , each defined by the nature of their research questions and the tools that they use. [7] [8] [9] Like other scientists, biologists use the scientific method to make observations , pose questions, generate hypotheses , perform experiments, and form conclusions about the world around them. [1] Life on Earth, which emerged more than 3.7 billion years ago, [10] is immensely diverse. Biologists have sought to study and classify the various forms of life, from prokaryotic organisms such as archaea and bacteria to eukaryotic organisms such as protists , fungi, plants, and animals. These various organisms contribute to the biodiversity of an ecosystem , where they play specialized roles in the cycling of nutrients and energy through their biophysical environment . History Main article: History of biology Diagram of a fly from Robert Hooke 's innovative Micrographia , 1665 The earliest of roots of science, which included medicine, can be traced to ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia in around 3000 to 1200 BCE . [11] [12] Their contributions shaped ancient Greek natural philosophy . [11] [12] [13] [14] Ancient Greek philosophers such as Aristotle (384–322 BCE) contributed extensively to the development of biological knowledge. He explored biological causation and the diversity of life. His successor, Theophrastus , began the scientific study of plants. [15] Scholars of the medieval Islamic world who wrote on biology included al-Jahiz (781–869), Al-Dīnawarī (828–896), who wrote on botany, [16] and Rhazes (865–925) who wrote on anatomy and physiology . Medicine was especially well studied by Islamic scholars working in Greek philosopher traditions, while natural history drew heavily on Aristotelian thought. Biology began to quickly develop with Anton van Leeuwenhoek 's dramatic improvement of the microscope . It was then that scholars discovered spermatozoa , bacteria, infusoria and the diversity of microscopic life. Investigations by Jan Swammerdam led to new interest in entomology and helped to develop techniques of microscopic dissection and staining . [17] Advances in microscopy had a profound impact on biological thinking. In the early 19th century, biologists pointed to the central importance of the cell . In 1838, Schleiden and Schwann began promoting the now universal ideas that (1) the basic unit of organisms is the cell and (2) that individual cells have all the characteristics of life, although they opposed the idea that (3) all cells come from the division of other cells, continuing to support spontaneous generation . However, Robert Remak and Rudolf Virchow were able to reify the third tenet, and by the 1860s most biologists accepted all three tenets which consolidated into cell theory . [18] [19] Meanwhile, taxonomy and classification became the focus of natural historians. Carl Linnaeus published a basic taxonomy for the natural world in 1735, and in the 1750s introduced scientific names for all his species. [20] Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon , treated species as artificial categories and living forms as malleable—even suggesting the possibility of common descent . [21] In 1842, Charles Darwin penned his first sketch of On the Origin of Species . [22] Serious evolutionary thinking originated with the works of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck , who presented a coherent theory of evolution. [23] The British naturalist Charles Darwin , combining the biogeographical approach of Humboldt , the uniformitarian geology of Lyell , Malthus's writings on population growth, and his own morphological expertise and extensive natural observations, forged a more successful evolutionary theory based on natural selection ; similar reasoning and evidence led Alfred Russel Wallace to independently reach the same conclusions. [24] [25] The basis for modern genetics began with the work of Gregor Mendel in 1865. [26] This outlined the principles of biological inheritance. [27] However, the significance of his work was not realized until the early 20th century when evolution became a unified theory as the modern synthesis reconciled Darwinian evolution with classical genetics . [28] In the 1940s and early 1950s, a series of experiments by Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase pointed to DNA as the component of chromosomes that held the trait-carrying units that had become known as genes . A focus on new kinds of model organisms such as viruses and bacteria, along with the discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953, marked the transition to the era of molecular genetics . From the 1950s onwards, biology has been vastly extended in the molecular domain. The genetic code was cracked by Har Gobind Khorana , Robert W. Holley and Marshall Warren Nirenberg after DNA was understood to contain codons . The Human Genome Project was launched in 1990 to map the human genome . [29] Chemical basis Further information: Chemistry All organisms are made up of chemical elements ; [30] oxygen , carbon , hydrogen , and nitrogen account for most (96%) of the mass of all organisms, with calcium , phosphorus , sulfur , sodium , chlorine , and magnesium constituting essentially all the remainder. Different elements can combine to form compounds such as water, which is fundamental to life. [30] Biochemistry is the study of chemical processes within and relating to living organisms . Molecular biology is the branch of biology that seeks to understand the molecular basis of biological activity in and between cells, including molecular synthesis, modification, mechanisms, and interactions. Water See also: Planetary habitability , Circumstellar habitable zone , and Water distribution on Earth Model of hydrogen bonds (1) between molecules of water Life arose from the Earth's first ocean, which formed some 3.8 billion years ago. [31] Since then, water continues to be the most abundant molecule in every organism. Water is important to life because it is an effective solvent , capable of dissolving solutes such as sodium and chloride ions or other small molecules to form an aqueous solution . Once dissolved in water, these solutes are more likely to come in contact with one another and therefore take part in chemical reactions that sustain life. [31] In terms of its molecular structure , water is a small polar molecule with a bent shape formed by the polar covalent bonds of two hydrogen (H) atoms to one oxygen (O) atom (H2O). [31] Because the O–H bonds are polar, the oxygen atom has a slight negative charge and the two hydrogen atoms have a slight positive charge. [31] This polar property of water allows it to attract other water molecules via hydrogen bonds, which makes water cohesive . [31] Surface tension results from the cohesive force due to the attraction between molecules at the surface of the liquid. [31] Water is also adhesive as it is able to adhere to the surface of any polar or charged non-water molecules. [31] Water is denser as a liquid than it is as a solid (or ice). [31] This unique property of water allows ice to float above liquid water such as ponds, lakes, and oceans, thereby insulating the liquid below from the cold air above. [31] Water has the capacity to absorb energy, giving it a higher specific heat capacity than other solvents such as ethanol . [31] Thus, a large amount of energy is needed to break the hydrogen bonds between water molecules to convert liquid water into water vapor . [31] As a molecule, water is not completely stable as each water molecule continuously dissociates into hydrogen and hydroxyl ions before reforming into a water molecule again. [31] In pure water , the number of hydrogen ions balances (or equals) the number of hydroxyl ions, resulting in a pH that is neutral. Organic compounds Further information: Organic chemistry Organic compounds such as glucose are vital to organisms. Organic compounds are molecules that contain carbon bonded to another element such as hydrogen. [31] With the exception of water, nearly all the molecules that make up each organism contain carbon. [31] [32] Carbon can form covalent bonds with up to four other atoms, enabling it to form diverse, large, and complex molecules. [31] [32] For example, a single carbon atom can form four single covalent bonds such as in methane , two double covalent bonds such as in carbon dioxide (CO2), or a triple covalent bond such as in carbon monoxide (CO). Moreover, carbon can form very long chains of interconnecting carbon–carbon bonds such as octane or ring-like structures such as glucose . The simplest form of an organic molecule is the hydrocarbon , which is a large family of organic compounds that are composed of hydrogen atoms bonded to a chain of carbon atoms. A hydrocarbon backbone can be substituted by other elements such as oxygen (O), hydrogen (H), phosphorus (P), and sulfur (S), which can change the chemical behavior of that compound. [31] Groups of atoms that contain these elements (O-, H-, P-, and S-) and are bonded to a central carbon atom or skeleton are called functional groups . [31] There are six prominent functional groups that can be found in organisms: amino group , carboxyl group , carbonyl group , hydroxyl group , phosphate group , and sulfhydryl group . [31] In 1953, the Miller–Urey experiment showed that organic compounds could be synthesized abiotically within a closed system mimicking the conditions of early Earth , thus suggesting that complex organic molecules could have arisen spontaneously in early Earth (see abiogenesis ). [33] [31] Macromolecules Main article: Macromolecule The (a) primary, (b) secondary, (c) tertiary, and (d) quaternary structures of a hemoglobin protein Macromolecules are large molecules made up of smaller subunits or monomers . [34] Monomers include sugars, amino acids, and nucleotides. [35] Carbohydrates include monomers and polymers of sugars. [36] Lipids are the only class of macromolecules that are not made up of polymers. They include steroids , phospholipids , and fats, [35] largely nonpolar and hydrophobic (water-repelling) substances. [37] Proteins are the most diverse of the macromolecules. They include enzymes , transport proteins , large signaling molecules, antibodies , and structural proteins . The basic unit (or monomer) of a protein is an amino acid . [34] Twenty amino acids are used in proteins. [34] Nucleic acids are polymers of nucleotides . [38] Their function is to store, transmit, and express hereditary information. [35] Cells Main article: Cell (biology) Cell theory states that cells are the fundamental units of life, it a unity of Protoplasm made of cytoplasm and nucleus surrounded by a cell membrane. [39] that all living things are composed of one or more cells, and that all cells arise from preexisting cells through cell division . [40] Most cells are very small, with diameters ranging from 1 to 100 micrometers and are therefore only visible under a light or electron microscope . [41] There are generally two types of cells: eukaryotic cells, which contain a nucleus , and prokaryotic cells, which do not. Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms such as bacteria , whereas eukaryotes can be single-celled or multicellular . In multicellular organisms , every cell in the organism's body is derived ultimately from a single cell in a fertilized egg . Cell structure Structure of an animal cell depicting various organelles Every cell is enclosed within a cell membrane that separates its cytoplasm from the extracellular space . [42] A cell membrane consists of a lipid bilayer , including cholesterols that sit between phospholipids to maintain their fluidity at various temperatures. Cell membranes are semipermeable , allowing small molecules such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, and water to pass through while restricting the movement of larger molecules and charged particles such as ions . [43] Cell membranes also contains membrane proteins , including integral membrane proteins that go across the membrane serving as membrane transporters , and peripheral proteins that loosely attach to the outer side of the cell membrane, acting as enzymes shaping the cell. [44] Cell membranes are involved in various cellular processes such as cell adhesion , storing electrical energy , and cell signalling and serve as the attachment surface for several extracellular structures such as a cell wall , glycocalyx , and cytoskeleton . Structure of a plant cell Within the cytoplasm of a cell, there are many biomolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids . [45] In addition to biomolecules, eukaryotic cells have specialized structures called organelles that have their own lipid bilayers or are spatially units. [46] These organelles include the cell nucleus, which contains most of the cell's DNA, or mitochondria , which generates adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to power cellular processes. Other organelles such as endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus play a role in the synthesis and packaging of proteins, respectively. Biomolecules such as proteins can be engulfed by lysosomes , another specialized organelle. Plant cells have additional organelles that distinguish them from animal cells such as a cell wall that provides support for the plant cell, chloroplasts that harvest sunlight energy to produce sugar, and vacuoles that provide storage and structural support as well as being involved in reproduction and breakdown of plant seeds. [46] Eukaryotic cells also have cytoskeleton that is made up of microtubules , intermediate filaments , and microfilaments , all of which provide support for the cell and are involved in the movement of the cell and its organelles. [46] In terms of their structural composition, the microtubules are made up of tubulin (e.g., α-tubulin and β-tubulin whereas intermediate filaments are made up of fibrous proteins. [46] Microfilaments are made up of actin molecules that interact with other strands of proteins. [46] Metabolism Further information: Bioenergetics Example of an enzyme-catalysed exothermic reaction All cells require energy to sustain cellular processes. Metabolism is the set of chemical reactions in an organism. The three main purposes of metabolism are: the conversion of food to energy to run cellular processes; the conversion of food/fuel to monomer building blocks; and the elimination of metabolic wastes . These enzyme-catalyzed reactions allow organisms to grow and reproduce, maintain their structures, and respond to their environments. Metabolic reactions may be categorized as catabolic —the breaking down of compounds (for example, the breaking down of glucose to pyruvate by cellular respiration ); or anabolic —the building up ( synthesis ) of compounds (such as proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids). Usually, catabolism releases energy, and anabolism consumes energy. The chemical reactions of metabolism are organized into metabolic pathways , in which one chemical is transformed through a series of steps into another chemical, each step being facilitated by a specific enzyme. Enzymes are crucial to metabolism because they allow organisms to drive desirable reactions that require energy that will not occur by themselves, by coupling them to spontaneous reactions that release energy. Enzymes act as catalysts —they allow a reaction to proceed more rapidly without being consumed by it—by reducing the amount of activation energy needed to convert reactants into products . Enzymes also allow the regulation of the rate of a metabolic reaction, for example in response to changes in the cell's environment or to signals from other cells. Cellular respiration Respiration in a eukaryotic cell Cellular respiration is a set of metabolic reactions and processes that take place in cells to convert chemical energy from nutrients into adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and then release waste products. [47] The reactions involved in respiration are catabolic reactions , which break large molecules into smaller ones, releasing energy. Respiration is one of the key ways a cell releases chemical energy to fuel cellular activity. The overall reaction occurs in a series of biochemical steps, some of which are redox reactions. Although cellular respiration is technically a combustion reaction , it clearly does not resemble one when it occurs in a cell because of the slow, controlled release of energy from the series of reactions. Sugar in the form of glucose is the main nutrient used by animal and plant cells in respiration. Cellular respiration involving oxygen is called aerobic respiration, which has four stages: glycolysis , citric acid cycle (or Krebs cycle), electron transport chain , and oxidative phosphorylation . [48] Glycolysis is a metabolic process that occurs in the cytoplasm whereby glucose is converted into two pyruvates , with two net molecules of ATP being produced at the same time. [48] Each pyruvate is then oxidized into acetyl-CoA by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex , which also generates NADH and carbon dioxide. Acetyl-Coa enters the citric acid cycle, which takes places inside the mitochondrial matrix. At the end of the cycle, the total yield from 1 glucose (or 2 pyruvates) is 6 NADH, 2 FADH2, and 2 ATP molecules. Finally, the next stage is oxidative phosphorylation, which in eukaryotes, occurs in the mitochondrial cristae . Oxidative phosphorylation comprises the electron transport chain, which is a series of four protein complexes that transfer electrons from one complex to another, thereby releasing energy from NADH and FADH2 that is coupled to the pumping of protons (hydrogen ions) across the inner mitochondrial membrane ( chemiosmosis ), which generates a proton motive force . [48] Energy from the proton motive force drives the enzyme ATP synthase to synthesize more ATPs by phosphorylating ADPs . The transfer of electrons terminates with molecular oxygen being the final electron acceptor . If oxygen were not present, pyruvate would not be metabolized by cellular respiration but undergoes a process of fermentation . The pyruvate is not transported into the mitochondrion but remains in the cytoplasm, where it is converted to waste products that may be removed from the cell. This serves the purpose of oxidizing the electron carriers so that they can perform glycolysis again and removing the excess pyruvate. Fermentation oxidizes NADH to NAD+ so it can be re-used in glycolysis. In the absence of oxygen, fermentation prevents the buildup of NADH in the cytoplasm and provides NAD+ for glycolysis. This waste product varies depending on the organism. In skeletal muscles, the waste product is lactic acid . This type of fermentation is called lactic acid fermentation . In strenuous exercise, when energy demands exceed energy supply, the respiratory chain cannot process all of the hydrogen atoms joined by NADH. During anaerobic glycolysis, NAD+ regenerates when pairs of hydrogen combine with pyruvate to form lactate. Lactate formation is catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase in a reversible reaction. Lactate can also be used as an indirect precursor for liver glycogen. During recovery, when oxygen becomes available, NAD+ attaches to hydrogen from lactate to form ATP. In yeast, the waste products are ethanol and carbon dioxide. This type of fermentation is known as alcoholic or ethanol fermentation . The ATP generated in this process is made by substrate-level phosphorylation , which does not require oxygen. Photosynthesis Main article: Photosynthesis Photosynthesis changes sunlight into chemical energy, splits water to liberate O2, and fixes CO2 into sugar. Photosynthesis is a process used by plants and other organisms to convert light energy into chemical energy that can later be released to fuel the organism's metabolic activities via cellular respiration. This chemical energy is stored in carbohydrate molecules, such as sugars, which are synthesized from carbon dioxide and water. [49] [50] [51] In most cases, oxygen is released as a waste product. Most plants, algae , and cyanobacteria perform photosynthesis, which is largely responsible for producing and maintaining the oxygen content of the Earth's atmosphere, and supplies most of the energy necessary for life on Earth. [52] Photosynthesis has four stages: Light absorption , electron transport, ATP synthesis, and carbon fixation . [48] Light absorption is the initial step of photosynthesis whereby light energy is absorbed by chlorophyll pigments attached to proteins in the thylakoid membranes . The absorbed light energy is used to remove electrons from a donor (water) to a primary electron acceptor, a quinone designated as Q. In the second stage, electrons move from the quinone primary electron acceptor through a series of electron carriers until they reach a final electron acceptor, which is usually the oxidized form of NADP+, which is reduced to NADPH, a process that takes place in a protein complex called photosystem I (PSI). The transport of electrons is coupled to the movement of protons (or hydrogen) from the stroma to the thylakoid membrane, which forms a pH gradient across the membrane as hydrogen becomes more concentrated in the lumen than in the stroma. This is analogous to the proton-motive force generated across the inner mitochondrial membrane in aerobic respiration. [48] During the third stage of photosynthesis, the movement of protons down their concentration gradients from the thylakoid lumen to the stroma through the ATP synthase is coupled to the synthesis of ATP by that same ATP synthase. [48] The NADPH and ATPs generated by the light-dependent reactions in the second and third stages, respectively, provide the energy and electrons to drive the synthesis of glucose by fixing atmospheric carbon dioxide into existing organic carbon compounds, such as ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP) in a sequence of light-independent (or dark) reactions called the Calvin cycle . [53] Cell signaling Main article: Cell signaling Cell signaling (or communication) is the ability of cells to receive, process, and transmit signals with its environment and with itself. [54] [55] Signals can be non-chemical such as light, electrical impulses , and heat, or chemical signals (or ligands ) that interact with receptors , which can be found embedded in the cell membrane of another cell or located deep inside a cell. [56] [55] There are generally four types of chemical signals: autocrine , paracrine , juxtacrine , and hormones . [56] In autocrine signaling, the ligand affects the same cell that releases it. Tumor cells, for example, can reproduce uncontrollably because they release signals that initiate their own self-division. In paracrine signaling, the ligand diffuses to nearby cells and affects them. For example, brain cells called neurons release ligands called neurotransmitters that diffuse across a synaptic cleft to bind with a receptor on an adjacent cell such as another neuron or muscle cell . In juxtacrine signaling, there is direct contact between the signaling and responding cells. Finally, hormones are ligands that travel through the circulatory systems of animals or vascular systems of plants to reach their target cells. Once a ligand binds with a receptor, it can influence the behavior of another cell, depending on the type of receptor. For instance, neurotransmitters that bind with an inotropic receptor can alter the excitability of a target cell. Other types of receptors include protein kinase receptors (e.g., receptor for the hormone insulin ) and G protein-coupled receptors . Activation of G protein-coupled receptors can initiate second messenger cascades. The process by which a chemical or physical signal is transmitted through a cell as a series of molecular events is called signal transduction Cell cycle In meiosis, the chromosomes duplicate and the homologous chromosomes exchange genetic information during meiosis I. The daughter cells divide again in meiosis II to form haploid gametes . Main article: Cell cycle The cell cycle is a series of events that take place in a cell that cause it to divide into two daughter cells. These events include the duplication of its DNA and some of its organelles , and the subsequent partitioning of its cytoplasm into two daughter cells in a process called cell division . [57] In eukaryotes (i.e., animal, plant, fungal , and protist cells), there are two distinct types of cell division: mitosis and meiosis . [58] Mitosis is part of the cell cycle, in which replicated chromosomes are separated into two new nuclei. Cell division gives rise to genetically identical cells in which the total number of chromosomes is maintained. In general, mitosis (division of the nucleus) is preceded by the S stage of interphase (during which the DNA is replicated) and is often followed by telophase and cytokinesis ; which divides the cytoplasm , organelles and cell membrane of one cell into two new cells containing roughly equal shares of these cellular components. The different stages of mitosis all together define the mitotic phase of an animal cell cycle—the division of the mother cell into two genetically identical daughter cells. [59] The cell cycle is a vital process by which a single-celled fertilized egg develops into a mature organism, as well as the process by which hair, skin, blood cells , and some internal organs are renewed. After cell division, each of the daughter cells begin the interphase of a new cycle. In contrast to mitosis, meiosis results in four haploid daughter cells by undergoing one round of DNA replication followed by two divisions. [60] Homologous chromosomes are separated in the first division ( meiosis I ), and sister chromatids are separated in the second division ( meiosis II ). Both of these cell division cycles are used in the process of sexual reproduction at some point in their life cycle. Both are believed to be present in the last eukaryotic common ancestor. Prokaryotes (i.e., archaea and bacteria) can also undergo cell division (or binary fission ). Unlike the processes of mitosis and meiosis in eukaryotes, binary fission takes in prokaryotes takes place without the formation of a spindle apparatus on the cell. Before binary fission, DNA in the bacterium is tightly coiled. After it has uncoiled and duplicated, it is pulled to the separate poles of the bacterium as it increases the size to prepare for splitting. Growth of a new cell wall begins to separate the bacterium (triggered by FtsZ polymerization and "Z-ring" formation) [61] The new cell wall ( septum ) fully develops, resulting in the complete split of the bacterium. The new daughter cells have tightly coiled DNA rods, ribosomes , and plasmids . Genetics Main article: Classical genetics Punnett square depicting a cross between two pea plants heterozygous for purple (B) and white (b) blossoms Genetics is the scientific study of inheritance. [62] [63] [64] Mendelian inheritance , specifically, is the process by which genes and traits are passed on from parents to offspring. [27] It has several principles. The first is that genetic characteristics, alleles , are discrete and have alternate forms (e.g., purple vs. white or tall vs. dwarf), each inherited from one of two parents. Based on the law of dominance and uniformity , which states that some alleles are dominant while others are recessive ; an organism with at least one dominant allele will display the phenotype of that dominant allele. During gamete formation, the alleles for each gene segregate, so that each gamete carries only one allele for each gene. Heterozygotic individuals produce gametes with an equal frequency of two alleles. Finally, the law of independent assortment , states that genes of different traits can segregate independently during the formation of gametes, i.e., genes are unlinked. An exception to this rule would include traits that are sex-linked . Test crosses can be performed to experimentally determine the underlying genotype of an organism with a dominant phenotype. [65] A Punnett square can be used to predict the results of a test cross. The chromosome theory of inheritance , which states that genes are found on chromosomes, was supported by Thomas Morgans 's experiments with fruit flies , which established the sex linkage between eye color and sex in these insects. [66] Genes and DNA Further information: Gene and DNA Bases lie between two spiraling DNA strands. A gene is a unit of heredity that corresponds to a region of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) that carries genetic information that controls form or function of an organism. DNA is composed of two polynucleotide chains that coil around each other to form a double helix . [67] It is found as linear chromosomes in eukaryotes , and circular chromosomes in prokaryotes . The set of chromosomes in a cell is collectively known as its genome . In eukaryotes, DNA is mainly in the cell nucleus . [68] In prokaryotes, the DNA is held within the nucleoid . [69] The genetic information is held within genes, and the complete assemblage in an organism is called its genotype . [70] DNA replication is a semiconservative process whereby each strand serves as a template for a new strand of DNA. [67] Mutations are heritable changes in DNA. [67] They can arise spontaneously as a result of replication errors that were not corrected by proofreading or can be induced by an environmental mutagen such as a chemical (e.g., nitrous acid , benzopyrene ) or radiation (e.g., x-ray , gamma ray , ultraviolet radiation , particles emitted by unstable isotopes). [67] Mutations can lead to phenotypic effects such as loss-of-function, gain-of-function , and conditional mutations. [67] Some mutations are beneficial, as they are a source of genetic variation for evolution. [67] Others are harmful if they were to result in a loss of function of genes needed for survival. [67] Gene expression The extended central dogma of molecular biology includes all the processes involved in the flow of genetic information. Main article: Gene expression Gene expression is the molecular process by which a genotype encoded in DNA gives rise to an observable phenotype in the proteins of an organism's body. This process is summarized by the central dogma of molecular biology , which was formulated by Francis Crick in 1958. [71] [72] [73] According to the Central Dogma, genetic information flows from DNA to RNA to protein. There are two gene expression processes: transcription (DNA to RNA) and translation (RNA to protein). [74] Gene regulation Main article: Regulation of gene expression The regulation of gene expression by environmental factors and during different stages of development can occur at each step of the process such as transcription , RNA splicing , translation , and post-translational modification of a protein. [75] Gene expression can be influenced by positive or negative regulation, depending on which of the two types of regulatory proteins called transcription factors bind to the DNA sequence close to or at a promoter. [75] A cluster of genes that share the same promoter is called an operon , found mainly in prokaryotes and some lower eukaryotes (e.g., Caenorhabditis elegans ). [75] [76] In positive regulation of gene expression, the activator is the transcription factor that stimulates transcription when it binds to the sequence near or at the promoter. Negative regulation occurs when another transcription factor called a repressor binds to a DNA sequence called an operator , which is part of an operon, to prevent transcription. Repressors can be inhibited by compounds called inducers (e.g., allolactose ), thereby allowing transcription to occur. [75] Specific genes that can be activated by inducers are called inducible genes , in contrast to constitutive genes that are almost constantly active. [75] In contrast to both, structural genes encode proteins that are not involved in gene regulation. [75] In addition to regulatory events involving the promoter, gene expression can also be regulated by epigenetic changes to chromatin , which is a complex of DNA and protein found in eukaryotic cells. [75] Genes, development, and evolution Main article: Evolutionary developmental biology Development is the process by which a multicellular organism (plant or animal) goes through a series of changes, starting from a single cell, and taking on various forms that are characteristic of its life cycle. [77] There are four key processes that underlie development: Determination , differentiation , morphogenesis , and growth. Determination sets the developmental fate of a cell, which becomes more restrictive during development. Differentiation is the process by which specialized cells from less specialized cells such as stem cells . [78] [79] Stem cells are undifferentiated or partially differentiated cells that can differentiate into various types of cells and proliferate indefinitely to produce more of the same stem cell. [80] Cellular differentiation dramatically changes a cell's size, shape, membrane potential , metabolic activity , and responsiveness to signals, which are largely due to highly controlled modifications in gene expression and epigenetics . With a few exceptions, cellular differentiation almost never involves a change in the DNA sequence itself. [81] Thus, different cells can have very different physical characteristics despite having the same genome . Morphogenesis, or the development of body form, is the result of spatial differences in gene expression. [77] A small fraction of the genes in an organism's genome called the developmental-genetic toolkit control the development of that organism. These toolkit genes are highly conserved among phyla , meaning that they are ancient and very similar in widely separated groups of animals. Differences in deployment of toolkit genes affect the body plan and the number, identity, and pattern of body parts. Among the most important toolkit genes are the Hox genes . Hox genes determine where repeating parts, such as the many vertebrae of snakes, will grow in a developing embryo or larva. [82] Evolution
Toggle the table of contents Astronomy From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific study of celestial objects This article is about the scientific study of celestial objects. For other uses, see Astronomy (disambiguation) . Not to be confused with astrology , a pseudoscience. Astronomy is one of the oldest natural sciences. The early civilizations in recorded history made methodical observations of the night sky . These include the Egyptians , Babylonians , Greeks , Indians , Chinese , Maya , and many ancient indigenous peoples of the Americas . In the past, astronomy included disciplines as diverse as astrometry , celestial navigation , observational astronomy , and the making of calendars . Professional astronomy is split into observational and theoretical branches. Observational astronomy is focused on acquiring data from observations of astronomical objects. This data is then analyzed using basic principles of physics. Theoretical astronomy is oriented toward the development of computer or analytical models to describe astronomical objects and phenomena. These two fields complement each other. Theoretical astronomy seeks to explain observational results and observations are used to confirm theoretical results. Astronomy is one of the few sciences in which amateurs play an active role . This is especially true for the discovery and observation of transient events . Amateur astronomers have helped with many important discoveries, such as finding new comets. Etymology Astronomical Observatory, New South Wales, Australia 1873 19th-century Quito Astronomical Observatory is located 12 minutes south of the Equator in Quito , Ecuador . [1] Astronomy (from the Greek ἀστρονομία from ἄστρον astron, "star" and -νομία -nomia from νόμος nomos, "law" or "culture") means "law of the stars" (or "culture of the stars" depending on the translation). Astronomy should not be confused with astrology , the belief system which claims that human affairs are correlated with the positions of celestial objects. [2] Although the two fields share a common origin, they are now entirely distinct. [3] Use of terms "astronomy" and "astrophysics" "Astronomy" and " astrophysics " are synonyms. [4] [5] [6] Based on strict dictionary definitions, "astronomy" refers to "the study of objects and matter outside the Earth's atmosphere and of their physical and chemical properties", [7] while "astrophysics" refers to the branch of astronomy dealing with "the behavior, physical properties, and dynamic processes of celestial objects and phenomena". [8] In some cases, as in the introduction of the introductory textbook The Physical Universe by Frank Shu , "astronomy" may be used to describe the qualitative study of the subject, whereas "astrophysics" is used to describe the physics-oriented version of the subject. [9] However, since most modern astronomical research deals with subjects related to physics, modern astronomy could actually be called astrophysics. [4] Some fields, such as astrometry , are purely astronomy rather than also astrophysics. Various departments in which scientists carry out research on this subject may use "astronomy" and "astrophysics", partly depending on whether the department is historically affiliated with a physics department, [5] and many professional astronomers have physics rather than astronomy degrees. [6] Some titles of the leading scientific journals in this field include The Astronomical Journal , The Astrophysical Journal , and Astronomy & Astrophysics . History A celestial map from the 17th century, by the Dutch cartographer Frederik de Wit . Ancient times In early historic times, astronomy only consisted of the observation and predictions of the motions of objects visible to the naked eye. In some locations, early cultures assembled massive artifacts that may have had some astronomical purpose. In addition to their ceremonial uses, these observatories could be employed to determine the seasons, an important factor in knowing when to plant crops and in understanding the length of the year. [10] Before tools such as the telescope were invented, early study of the stars was conducted using the naked eye. As civilizations developed, most notably in Egypt , Mesopotamia , Greece , Persia , India , China , and Central America , astronomical observatories were assembled and ideas on the nature of the Universe began to develop. Most early astronomy consisted of mapping the positions of the stars and planets, a science now referred to as astrometry . From these observations, early ideas about the motions of the planets were formed, and the nature of the Sun, Moon and the Earth in the Universe were explored philosophically. The Earth was believed to be the center of the Universe with the Sun, the Moon and the stars rotating around it. This is known as the geocentric model of the Universe, or the Ptolemaic system , named after Ptolemy . [11] The Suryaprajnaptisūtra, a 6th-century BC astronomy text of Jains at The Schoyen Collection, London. Above: its manuscript from c. 1500 AD. [12] A particularly important early development was the beginning of mathematical and scientific astronomy, which began among the Babylonians , who laid the foundations for the later astronomical traditions that developed in many other civilizations. [13] The Babylonians discovered that lunar eclipses recurred in a repeating cycle known as a saros . [14] Greek equatorial sundial , Alexandria on the Oxus , present-day Afghanistan 3rd–2nd century BC. Following the Babylonians, significant advances in astronomy were made in ancient Greece and the Hellenistic world. Greek astronomy is characterized from the start by seeking a rational, physical explanation for celestial phenomena. [15] In the 3rd century BC, Aristarchus of Samos estimated the size and distance of the Moon and Sun , and he proposed a model of the Solar System where the Earth and planets rotated around the Sun, now called the heliocentric model. [16] In the 2nd century BC, Hipparchus discovered precession , calculated the size and distance of the Moon and invented the earliest known astronomical devices such as the astrolabe . [17] Hipparchus also created a comprehensive catalog of 1020 stars, and most of the constellations of the northern hemisphere derive from Greek astronomy. [18] The Antikythera mechanism ( c. 150–80 BC) was an early analog computer designed to calculate the location of the Sun , Moon , and planets for a given date. Technological artifacts of similar complexity did not reappear until the 14th century, when mechanical astronomical clocks appeared in Europe. [19] Middle Ages Medieval Europe housed a number of important astronomers. Richard of Wallingford (1292–1336) made major contributions to astronomy and horology , including the invention of the first astronomical clock, the Rectangulus which allowed for the measurement of angles between planets and other astronomical bodies, as well as an equatorium called the Albion which could be used for astronomical calculations such as lunar , solar and planetary longitudes and could predict eclipses . Nicole Oresme (1320–1382) and Jean Buridan (1300–1361) first discussed evidence for the rotation of the Earth, furthermore, Buridan also developed the theory of impetus (predecessor of the modern scientific theory of inertia ) which was able to show planets were capable of motion without the intervention of angels. [20] Georg von Peuerbach (1423–1461) and Regiomontanus (1436–1476) helped make astronomical progress instrumental to Copernicus's development of the heliocentric model decades later. Astronomy flourished in the Islamic world and other parts of the world. This led to the emergence of the first astronomical observatories in the Muslim world by the early 9th century. [21] [22] [23] In 964, the Andromeda Galaxy , the largest galaxy in the Local Group , was described by the Persian Muslim astronomer Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi in his Book of Fixed Stars . [24] The SN 1006 supernova , the brightest apparent magnitude stellar event in recorded history, was observed by the Egyptian Arabic astronomer Ali ibn Ridwan and Chinese astronomers in 1006. Iranian scholar Al-Biruni observed that, contrary to Ptolemy , the Sun's apogee (highest point in the heavens) was mobile, not fixed. [25] Some of the prominent Islamic (mostly Persian and Arab) astronomers who made significant contributions to the science include Al-Battani , Thebit , Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi , Biruni , Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī , Al-Birjandi , and the astronomers of the Maragheh and Samarkand observatories. Astronomers during that time introduced many Arabic names now used for individual stars . [26] [27] It is also believed that the ruins at Great Zimbabwe and Timbuktu [28] may have housed astronomical observatories. [29] In Post-classical West Africa , Astronomers studied the movement of stars and relation to seasons, crafting charts of the heavens as well as precise diagrams of orbits of the other planets based on complex mathematical calculations. Songhai historian Mahmud Kati documented a meteor shower in August 1583. [30] [31] Europeans had previously believed that there had been no astronomical observation in sub-Saharan Africa during the pre-colonial Middle Ages, but modern discoveries show otherwise. [32] [33] [34] [35] For over six centuries (from the recovery of ancient learning during the late Middle Ages into the Enlightenment), the Roman Catholic Church gave more financial and social support to the study of astronomy than probably all other institutions. Among the Church's motives was finding the date for Easter . [36] Scientific revolution Galileo 's sketches and observations of the Moon revealed that the surface was mountainous. An astronomical chart from an early scientific manuscript, c. 1000. During the Renaissance , Nicolaus Copernicus proposed a heliocentric model of the solar system. His work was defended by Galileo Galilei and expanded upon by Johannes Kepler . Kepler was the first to devise a system that correctly described the details of the motion of the planets around the Sun. However, Kepler did not succeed in formulating a theory behind the laws he wrote down. [37] It was Isaac Newton , with his invention of celestial dynamics and his law of gravitation , who finally explained the motions of the planets. Newton also developed the reflecting telescope . [38] Improvements in the size and quality of the telescope led to further discoveries. The English astronomer John Flamsteed catalogued over 3000 stars, [39] More extensive star catalogues were produced by Nicolas Louis de Lacaille . The astronomer William Herschel made a detailed catalog of nebulosity and clusters, and in 1781 discovered the planet Uranus , the first new planet found. [40] During the 18–19th centuries, the study of the three-body problem by Leonhard Euler , Alexis Claude Clairaut , and Jean le Rond d'Alembert led to more accurate predictions about the motions of the Moon and planets. This work was further refined by Joseph-Louis Lagrange and Pierre Simon Laplace , allowing the masses of the planets and moons to be estimated from their perturbations. [41] Significant advances in astronomy came about with the introduction of new technology, including the spectroscope and photography . Joseph von Fraunhofer discovered about 600 bands in the spectrum of the Sun in 1814–15, which, in 1859, Gustav Kirchhoff ascribed to the presence of different elements. Stars were proven to be similar to the Earth's own Sun, but with a wide range of temperatures , masses , and sizes. [26] The existence of the Earth's galaxy, the Milky Way , as its own group of stars was only proved in the 20th century, along with the existence of "external" galaxies. The observed recession of those galaxies led to the discovery of the expansion of the Universe . [42] Theoretical astronomy led to speculations on the existence of objects such as black holes and neutron stars , which have been used to explain such observed phenomena as quasars , pulsars , blazars , and radio galaxies . Physical cosmology made huge advances during the 20th century. In the early 1900s the model of the Big Bang theory was formulated, heavily evidenced by cosmic microwave background radiation , Hubble's law , and the cosmological abundances of elements . Space telescopes have enabled measurements in parts of the electromagnetic spectrum normally blocked or blurred by the atmosphere. [43] In February 2016, it was revealed that the LIGO project had detected evidence of gravitational waves in the previous September. [44] [45] Observational astronomy Main article: Observational astronomy The main source of information about celestial bodies and other objects is visible light , or more generally electromagnetic radiation . [46] Observational astronomy may be categorized according to the corresponding region of the electromagnetic spectrum on which the observations are made. Some parts of the spectrum can be observed from the Earth's surface, while other parts are only observable from either high altitudes or outside the Earth's atmosphere. Specific information on these subfields is given below. Radio astronomy Main article: Radio astronomy Radio astronomy uses radiation with wavelengths greater than approximately one millimeter, outside the visible range. [47] Radio astronomy is different from most other forms of observational astronomy in that the observed radio waves can be treated as waves rather than as discrete photons . Hence, it is relatively easier to measure both the amplitude and phase of radio waves, whereas this is not as easily done at shorter wavelengths. [47] Although some radio waves are emitted directly by astronomical objects, a product of thermal emission , most of the radio emission that is observed is the result of synchrotron radiation , which is produced when electrons orbit magnetic fields . [47] Additionally, a number of spectral lines produced by interstellar gas , notably the hydrogen spectral line at 21 cm, are observable at radio wavelengths. [9] [47] A wide variety of other objects are observable at radio wavelengths, including supernovae , interstellar gas, pulsars , and active galactic nuclei . [9] [47] Infrared astronomy Main article: Infrared astronomy Infrared astronomy is founded on the detection and analysis of infrared radiation, wavelengths longer than red light and outside the range of our vision. The infrared spectrum is useful for studying objects that are too cold to radiate visible light, such as planets, circumstellar disks or nebulae whose light is blocked by dust. The longer wavelengths of infrared can penetrate clouds of dust that block visible light, allowing the observation of young stars embedded in molecular clouds and the cores of galaxies. Observations from the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) have been particularly effective at unveiling numerous galactic protostars and their host star clusters . [49] [50] With the exception of infrared wavelengths close to visible light, such radiation is heavily absorbed by the atmosphere, or masked, as the atmosphere itself produces significant infrared emission. Consequently, infrared observatories have to be located in high, dry places on Earth or in space. [51] Some molecules radiate strongly in the infrared. This allows the study of the chemistry of space; more specifically it can detect water in comets. [52] Optical astronomy The Subaru Telescope (left) and Keck Observatory (center) on Mauna Kea , both examples of an observatory that operates at near-infrared and visible wavelengths. The NASA Infrared Telescope Facility (right) is an example of a telescope that operates only at near-infrared wavelengths. Main article: Optical astronomy Historically, optical astronomy, also called visible light astronomy, is the oldest form of astronomy. [53] Images of observations were originally drawn by hand. In the late 19th century and most of the 20th century, images were made using photographic equipment. Modern images are made using digital detectors, particularly using charge-coupled devices (CCDs) and recorded on modern medium. Although visible light itself extends from approximately 4000 Å to 7000 Å (400 nm to 700 nm), [53] that same equipment can be used to observe some near-ultraviolet and near-infrared radiation. Ultraviolet astronomy Main article: Ultraviolet astronomy Ultraviolet astronomy employs ultraviolet wavelengths between approximately 100 and 3200 Å (10 to 320 nm). [47] Light at those wavelengths is absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere, requiring observations at these wavelengths to be performed from the upper atmosphere or from space. Ultraviolet astronomy is best suited to the study of thermal radiation and spectral emission lines from hot blue stars ( OB stars ) that are very bright in this wave band. This includes the blue stars in other galaxies, which have been the targets of several ultraviolet surveys. Other objects commonly observed in ultraviolet light include planetary nebulae , supernova remnants , and active galactic nuclei. [47] However, as ultraviolet light is easily absorbed by interstellar dust , an adjustment of ultraviolet measurements is necessary. [47] X-ray astronomy Main article: X-ray astronomy X-ray jet made from a supermassive black hole found by NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory, made visible by light from the early Universe X-ray astronomy uses X-ray wavelengths . Typically, X-ray radiation is produced by synchrotron emission (the result of electrons orbiting magnetic field lines), thermal emission from thin gases above 107 (10 million) kelvins , and thermal emission from thick gases above 107 Kelvin. [47] Since X-rays are absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere , all X-ray observations must be performed from high-altitude balloons , rockets , or X-ray astronomy satellites . Notable X-ray sources include X-ray binaries , pulsars , supernova remnants , elliptical galaxies , clusters of galaxies , and active galactic nuclei . [47] Gamma-ray astronomy Main article: Gamma ray astronomy Gamma ray astronomy observes astronomical objects at the shortest wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum. Gamma rays may be observed directly by satellites such as the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory or by specialized telescopes called atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes . [47] The Cherenkov telescopes do not detect the gamma rays directly but instead detect the flashes of visible light produced when gamma rays are absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere. [54] Most gamma-ray emitting sources are actually gamma-ray bursts , objects which only produce gamma radiation for a few milliseconds to thousands of seconds before fading away. Only 10% of gamma-ray sources are non-transient sources. These steady gamma-ray emitters include pulsars, neutron stars , and black hole candidates such as active galactic nuclei. [47] Fields not based on the electromagnetic spectrum In addition to electromagnetic radiation, a few other events originating from great distances may be observed from the Earth. In neutrino astronomy , astronomers use heavily shielded underground facilities such as SAGE , GALLEX , and Kamioka II/III for the detection of neutrinos . The vast majority of the neutrinos streaming through the Earth originate from the Sun , but 24 neutrinos were also detected from supernova 1987A . [47] Cosmic rays , which consist of very high energy particles (atomic nuclei) that can decay or be absorbed when they enter the Earth's atmosphere, result in a cascade of secondary particles which can be detected by current observatories. [55] Some future neutrino detectors may also be sensitive to the particles produced when cosmic rays hit the Earth's atmosphere. [47] Gravitational-wave astronomy is an emerging field of astronomy that employs gravitational-wave detectors to collect observational data about distant massive objects. A few observatories have been constructed, such as the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Observatory LIGO . LIGO made its first detection on 14 September 2015, observing gravitational waves from a binary black hole . [56] A second gravitational wave was detected on 26 December 2015 and additional observations should continue but gravitational waves require extremely sensitive instruments. [57] [58] The combination of observations made using electromagnetic radiation, neutrinos or gravitational waves and other complementary information, is known as multi-messenger astronomy . [59] [60] Astrometry and celestial mechanics Main articles: Astrometry and Celestial mechanics Star cluster Pismis 24 with a nebula One of the oldest fields in astronomy, and in all of science, is the measurement of the positions of celestial objects. Historically, accurate knowledge of the positions of the Sun, Moon, planets and stars has been essential in celestial navigation (the use of celestial objects to guide navigation) and in the making of calendars . [61] : 39 Careful measurement of the positions of the planets has led to a solid understanding of gravitational perturbations , and an ability to determine past and future positions of the planets with great accuracy, a field known as celestial mechanics . More recently the tracking of near-Earth objects will allow for predictions of close encounters or potential collisions of the Earth with those objects. [62] The measurement of stellar parallax of nearby stars provides a fundamental baseline in the cosmic distance ladder that is used to measure the scale of the Universe. Parallax measurements of nearby stars provide an absolute baseline for the properties of more distant stars, as their properties can be compared. Measurements of the radial velocity and proper motion of stars allow astronomers to plot the movement of these systems through the Milky Way galaxy. Astrometric results are the basis used to calculate the distribution of speculated dark matter in the galaxy. [63] During the 1990s, the measurement of the stellar wobble of nearby stars was used to detect large extrasolar planets orbiting those stars. [64] Theoretical astronomy
Toggle the table of contents Geography From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of lands and inhabitants of Earth For other uses, see Geography (disambiguation) and Geo (disambiguation) . Not to be confused with Geology . Part of a series on e Geography (from Ancient Greek γεωγραφία geōgraphía; combining gê 'Earth' and gráphō 'write') is the study of the lands, features, inhabitants, and phenomena of Earth . [1] Geography is an all-encompassing discipline that seeks an understanding of Earth and its human and natural complexities —not merely where objects are, but also how they have changed and come to be. While geography is specific to Earth, many concepts can be applied more broadly to other celestial bodies in the field of planetary science . [2] Geography has been called "a bridge between natural science and social science disciplines." [3] Origins of many of the concepts in geography can be traced to Greek Eratosthenes of Cyrene, who may have coined the term "geographia" ( c. 276 BC – c. 195/194 BC). [4] The first recorded use of the word γεωγραφία was as the title of a book by Greek scholar Claudius Ptolemy (100 – 170 AD). [1] This work created the so called "Ptolemaic tradition" of geography, which included "Ptolemaic cartographic theory." [5] However, the concepts of geography (such as cartography ) date back to the earliest attempts to understand the world spatially, with the earliest example of an attempted world map dating to the 9th century BCE in ancient Babylon . [6] The history of geography as a discipline spans cultures and millennia, being independently developed by multiple groups, and cross-pollinated by trade between these groups. The core concepts of geography consistent between all approaches are a focus on space, place, time, and scale. [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] Today, geography is an extremely broad discipline with multiple approaches and modalities. There have been multiple attempts to organize the discipline, including the four traditions of geography, and into branches. [13] [3] [14] Techniques employed can generally be broken down into quantitative [15] and qualitative [16] approaches, with many studies taking mixed-methods approaches. [17] Common techniques include cartography , remote sensing , interviews , and surveying . Fundamentals Physical map of Earth Political map of Earth Geography is a systematic study of the Earth (other celestial bodies are specified, such as "geography of Mars", or given another name, such as areography in the case of Mars), its features, and phenomena that take place on it. [18] [19] [20] For something to fall into the domain of geography, it generally needs some sort of spatial component that can be placed on a map , such as coordinates , place names, or addresses . This has led to geography being associated with cartography and place names. Although many geographers are trained in toponymy and cartology, this is not their main preoccupation. Geographers study the Earth's spatial and temporal distribution of phenomena, processes, and features as well as the interaction of humans and their environment . [21] Because space and place affect a variety of topics, such as economics, health, climate , plants, and animals, geography is highly interdisciplinary. The interdisciplinary nature of the geographical approach depends on an attentiveness to the relationship between physical and human phenomena and their spatial patterns. [22] Names of places...are not geography...To know by heart a whole gazetteer full of them would not, in itself, constitute anyone a geographer. Geography has higher aims than this: it seeks to classify phenomena (alike of the natural and of the political world, in so far as it treats of the latter), to compare, to generalize, to ascend from effects to causes, and, in doing so, to trace out the laws of nature and to mark their influences upon man. This is 'a description of the world'—that is Geography. In a word, Geography is a Science—a thing not of mere names but of argument and reason, of cause and effect. [23] William Hughes , 1863 Geography as a discipline can be split broadly into three main branches: human geography , physical geography , and technical geography . [3] [24] Human geography largely focuses on the built environment and how humans create, view, manage, and influence space. [24] Physical geography examines the natural environment and how organisms , climate, soil , water, and landforms produce and interact. [25] The difference between these approaches led to the development of integrated geography , which combines physical and human geography and concerns the interactions between the environment and humans. [21] Technical geography involves studying and developing the tools and techniques used by geographers, such as remote sensing, cartography, and geographic information system. [26] Key concepts Narrowing down geography to a few key concepts is extremely challenging, and subject to tremendous debate within the discipline. [27] In one attempt, the 1st edition of the book "Key Concepts in Geography" broke down this into chapters focusing on "Space," "Place," "Time," "Scale," and "Landscape." [28] The 2nd edition of the book expanded on these key concepts by adding "Environmental systems," "Social Systems," "Nature," " Globalization ," "Development," and "Risk," demonstrating how challenging narrowing the field can be. [27] Maps, like this 17th Century depiction of Pembrokeshire , are a central element in the study of geography Another approach used extensively in teaching geography are the Five themes of geography established by "Guidelines for Geographic Education: Elementary and Secondary Schools," published jointly by the National Council for Geographic Education and the Association of American Geographers in 1984. [29] [30] These themes are Location, place, relationships within places (often summarized as Human-Environment Interaction), movement, and regions [30] [31] The five themes of geography have shaped how American education approaches the topic in the years since. [30] [31] Space Main article: Space A right-handed three-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system used to indicate positions in space. Just as all phenomena exist in time and thus have a history, they also exist in space and have a geography. [32] United States National Research Council , 1997 For something to exist in the realm of geography, it must be able to be described spatially. [32] [33] Thus, space is the most fundamental concept at the foundation of geography. [7] [8] The concept is so basic, that geographers often have difficulty defining exactly what it is. Absolute space is the exact site, or spatial coordinates, of objects, persons, places, or phenomena under investigation. [7] We exist in space. [9] Absolute space leads to the view of the world as a photograph, with everything frozen in place when the coordinates were recorded. Today, geographers are trained to recognize the world as a dynamic space where all processes interact and take place, rather than a static image on a map. [7] [34] Place Main articles: Location , Place identity , and Sense of place Place is one of the most complex and important terms in geography. [9] [10] [11] [12] In human geography, place is the synthesis of the coordinates on the Earth's surface, the activity and use that occurs, has occurred, and will occur at the coordinates, and the meaning ascribed to the space by human individuals and groups. [33] [11] This can be extraordinarily complex, as different spaces may have different uses at different times and mean different things to different people. In physical geography, a place includes all of the physical phenomena that occur in space, including the lithosphere , atmosphere , hydrosphere , and biosphere. [12] Places do not exist in a vacuum and instead have complex spatial relationships with each other, and place is concerned how a location is situated in relation to all other locations. [35] [36] As a discipline then, the term place in geography includes all spatial phenomena occurring at a location, the diverse uses and meanings humans ascribe to that location, and how that location impacts and is impacted by all other locations on Earth. [11] [12] In one of Yi-Fu Tuan 's papers, he explains that in his view, geography is the study of Earth as a home for humanity, and thus place and the complex meaning behind the term is central to the discipline of geography. [10] Time Main articles: Time geography and Historical geography Examples of the visual language of time geography: space-time cube, path, prism, bundle, and other concepts. Time is usually thought to be within the domain of history , however, it is of significant concern in the discipline of geography. [37] [38] [39] In physics, space and time are not separated, and are combined into the concept of spacetime . [40] Geography is subject to the laws of physics, and in studying things that occur in space, time must be considered. Time in geography is more than just the historical record of events that occurred at various discrete coordinates; but also includes modeling the dynamic movement of people, organisms, and things through space. [9] Time facilitates movement through space, ultimately allowing things to flow through a system. [37] The amount of time an individual, or group of people, spends in a place will often shape their attachment and perspective to that place. [9] Time constrains the possible paths that can be taken through space, given a starting point, possible routes, and rate of travel. [41] Visualizing time over space is challenging in terms of cartography, and includes Space-Prism, advanced 3D geovisualizations, and animated maps . [35] [41] [42] [34] Scale Main articles: Scale (geography) , Scale (ratio) , and Scale (map) A graphical or bar scale. A map would also usually give its scale numerically ("1:50,000", for instance, means that one cm on the map represents 50,000 cm of real space, which is 500 meters) Scale in the context of a map is the ratio between a distance measured on the map and the corresponding distance as measured on the ground. [2] [43] This concept is fundamental to the discipline of geography, not just cartography, in that phenomena being investigated appear different depending on the scale used. [44] [45] Scale is the frame that geographers use to measure space, and ultimately to try and understand a place. [43] Laws of geography Main article: Quantitative geography § Laws of geography During the quantitative revolution, geography shifted to an empirical law-making ( nomothetic ) approach. [46] [47] Several laws of geography have been proposed since then, most notably by Waldo Tobler and can be viewed as a product of the quantitative revolution. [48] In general, some dispute the entire concept of laws in geography and the social sciences. [35] [49] [50] These criticisms have been addressed by Tobler and others, such as Michael Frank Goodchild . [49] [50] However, this is an ongoing source of debate in geography and is unlikely to be resolved anytime soon. Several laws have been proposed, and Tobler's first law of geography is the most generally accepted in geography. Some have argued that geographic laws do not need to be numbered. The existence of a first invites a second, and many have proposed themselves as that. It has also been proposed that Tobler's first law of geography should be moved to the second and replaced with another. [50] A few of the proposed laws of geography are below: Tobler's second law of geography : "The phenomenon external to a geographic area of interest affects what goes on inside." [49] [51] Arbia's law of geography : "Everything is related to everything else, but things observed at a coarse spatial resolution are more related than things observed at a finer resolution." [44] [49] [45] [52] [53] Spatial heterogeneity : Geographic variables exhibit uncontrolled variance. [50] [54] [55] The uncertainty principle: "That the geographic world is infinitely complex and that any representation must therefore contain elements of uncertainty, that many definitions used in acquiring geographic data contain elements of vagueness, and that it is impossible to measure location on the Earth's surface exactly." [50] Additionally, several variations or amendments to these laws exist within the literature, although not as well supported. For example, one paper proposed an amendmended version of Tobler's first law of geography, referred to in the text as the Tobler–von Thünen law, [48] which states: "Everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things, as a consequence of accessibility." [Note 1] [48] Sub-disciplines Geography is a branch of inquiry that focuses on spatial information on Earth. It is an extremely broad topic and can be broken down multiple ways. [14] There have been several approaches to doing this spanning at least several centuries, including "four traditions of geography" and into distinct branches. [56] [13] The Four traditions of geography are often used to divide the different historical approaches theories geographers have taken to the discipline. [13] In contrast, geography's branches describe contemporary applied geographical approaches. [3] Four traditions of geography Main article: Four traditions of geography Geography is an extremely broad field. Because of this, many view the various definitions of geography proposed over the decades as inadequate. To address this, William D. Pattison proposed the concept of the "Four traditions of Geography" in 1964. [13] [57] [58] These traditions are the Spatial or Locational Tradition, the Man-Land or Human-Environment Interaction Tradition (sometimes referred to as Integrated geography ), the Area Studies or Regional Tradition, and the Earth Science Tradition. [13] [57] [58] These concepts are broad sets of geography philosophies bound together within the discipline. They are one of many ways geographers organize the major sets of thoughts and philosophies within the discipline. [13] [57] [58] Branches of geography Main page: Category:Branches of geography In another approach to the abovementioned four traditions, geography is organized into applied branches. [59] [60] The UNESCO Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems organizes geography into the three categories of human geography , physical geography , and technical geography . [3] [61] [59] [14] Some publications limit the number of branches to physical and human, describing them as the principal branches. [33] Geographers rarely focus on just one of these topics, often using one as their primary focus and then incorporating data and methods from the other branches. Often, geographers are asked to describe what they do by individuals outside the discipline [10] and are likely to identify closely with a specific branch, or sub-branch when describing themselves to lay people. Human geography studies people and their communities, cultures, economies, and environmental interactions by studying their relations with and across space and place. [33] Physical geography is concerned with the study of processes and patterns in the natural environment like the atmosphere , hydrosphere , biosphere , and geosphere . [33] Technical geography is interested in studying and applying techniques and methods to store, process, analyze, visualize, and use spatial data. [60] It is the newest of the branches, the most controversial, and often other terms are used in the literature to describe the emerging category. These branches use similar geographic philosophies, concepts, and tools and often overlap significantly. Physical Main article: Physical geography Physical geography (or physiography) focuses on geography as an Earth science . [62] [63] [64] It aims to understand the physical problems and the issues of lithosphere , hydrosphere , atmosphere , pedosphere , and global flora and fauna patterns ( biosphere ). Physical geography is the study of earth's seasons, climate , atmosphere , soil , streams, landforms, and oceans. [65] Physical geographers will often work in identifying and monitoring the use of natural resources. Physical geography can be divided into many broad categories, including: Main article: Human geography Human geography (or anthropogeography) is a branch of geography that focuses on studying patterns and processes that shape human society. [66] It encompasses the human, political, cultural , social, and economic aspects. In industry, human geographers often work in city planning, public health, or business analysis. Human geography can be divided into many broad categories, such as: Main article: Technical geography Technical geography concerns studying and developing tools, techniques, and statistical methods employed to collect, analyze, use, and understand spatial data. [26] [3] [59] [61] Technical geography is the most recently recognized, and controversial, of the branches. Its use dates back to 1749, when a book published by Edward Cave organized the discipline into a section containing content such as cartographic techniques and globes. [56] There are several other terms, often used interchangeably with technical geography to subdivide the discipline, including "techniques of geographic analysis," [67] "Geographic Information Technology," [1] "Geography method's and techniques," [68] " Geographic Information Science ," [69] " geoinformatics ," " geomatics ," and "information geography". There are subtle differences to each concept and term; however, technical geography is one of the broadest, is consistent with the naming convention of the other two branches, has been in use since the 1700s, and has been used by the UNESCO Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems to divide geography into themes. [3] [59] [56] As academic fields increasingly specialize in their nature, technical geography has emerged as a branch of geography specializing in geographic methods and thought. [26] The emergence of technical geography has brought new relevance to the broad discipline of geography by serving as a set of unique methods for managing the interdisciplinary nature of the phenomena under investigation. While human and physical geographers use the techniques employed by technical geographers, technical geography is more concerned with the fundamental spatial concepts and technologies than the nature of the data. [26] [60] It is therefore closely associated with the spatial tradition of geography while being applied to the other two major branches. A technical geographer might work as a GIS analyst, a GIS developer working to make new software tools, or create general reference maps incorporating human and natural features. [70] Technical geography can be divided into many broad categories, such as: Quantitative geography Methods This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2022) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) All geographic research and analysis start with asking the question "where," followed by "why there." Geographers start with the fundamental assumption set forth in Tobler's first law of geography , that "everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things." [35] [36] As spatial interrelationships are key to this synoptic science, maps are a key tool. Classical cartography has been joined by a more modern approach to geographical analysis, computer-based geographic information systems (GIS). In their study, geographers use four interrelated approaches: Analytical – Asks why we find features and populations in a specific geographic area. Descriptive – Simply specifies the locations of features and populations. Regional – Examines systematic relationships between categories for a specific region or location on the planet. Systematic – Groups geographical knowledge into categories that can be explored globally. Quantitative methods Main articles: Quantitative revolution and Quantitative geography James Cook 's 1770 chart of New Zealand Quantitative methods in geography became particularly influential in the discipline during the quantitative revolution of the 1950s and 60s. [15] These methods revitalized the discipline in many ways, allowing scientific testing of hypotheses and proposing scientific geographic theories and laws. [71] The quantitative revolution heavily influenced and revitalized technical geography, and lead to the development of the subfield of quantitative geography. [26] [15] Quantitative cartography Main article: Cartography Cartography is the art, science, and technology of making maps. [72] Cartographers study the Earth's surface representation with abstract symbols (map making). Although other subdisciplines of geography rely on maps for presenting their analyses, the actual making of maps is abstract enough to be regarded separately. [73] Cartography has grown from a collection of drafting techniques into an actual science. Cartographers must learn cognitive psychology and ergonomics to understand which symbols convey information about the Earth most effectively and behavioural psychology to induce the readers of their maps to act on the information. They must learn geodesy and fairly advanced mathematics to understand how the shape of the Earth affects the distortion of map symbols projected onto a flat surface for viewing. It can be said, without much controversy, that cartography is the seed from which the larger field of geography grew. Geographic information systems Main article: Geographic information system Geographic information systems (GIS) deal with storing information about the Earth for automatic retrieval by a computer in an accurate manner appropriate to the information's purpose. [74] In addition to all of the other subdisciplines of geography, GIS specialists must understand computer science and database systems. GIS has revolutionized the field of cartography: nearly all mapmaking is now done with the assistance of some form of GIS software . The science of using GIS software and GIS techniques to represent, analyse, and predict the spatial relationships is called geographic information science (GISc). [75] Remote sensing Synthetic aperture radar image of Death Valley colored using polarimetry Remote sensing is the art, science, and technology of obtaining information about Earth's features from measurements made at a distance. [76] Remotely sensed data can be either passive, such as traditional photography , or active, such as LiDAR . [76] A variety of platforms can be used for remote sensing, including satellite imagery , aerial photography (including consumer drones), and data obtained from hand-held sensors. [76] Products from remote sensing include Digital elevation model and cartographic base maps. Geographers increasingly use remotely sensed data to obtain information about the Earth's land surface , ocean, and atmosphere, because it: (a) supplies objective information at a variety of spatial scales (local to global), (b) provides a synoptic view of the area of interest, (c) allows access to distant and inaccessible sites, (d) provides spectral information outside the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum , and (e) facilitates studies of how features/areas change over time. Remotely sensed data may be analyzed independently or in conjunction with other digital data layers (e.g., in a geographic information system). Remote sensing aids in land use, land cover (LULC) mapping, by helping to determine both what is naturally occurring on a piece of land and what human activities are taking place on it. [77] Geostatistics Main article: Geostatistics Geostatistics deal with quantitative data analysis, specifically the application of a statistical methodology to the exploration of geographic phenomena. [78] Geostatistics is used extensively in a variety of fields, including hydrology , geology, petroleum exploration, weather analysis, urban planning , logistics, and epidemiology . The mathematical basis for geostatistics derives from cluster analysis , linear discriminant analysis and non-parametric statistical tests , and a variety of other subjects. Applications of geostatistics rely heavily on geographic information systems , particularly for the interpolation (estimate) of unmeasured points. Geographers are making notable contributions to the method of quantitative techniques. Qualitative methods Main article: Qualitative geography Qualitative methods geography in geography are descriptive rather than numerical or statistical in nature. [79] [16] [46] They add context to concepts, and explore human concepts like beliefs and perspective that are difficult or impossible to quantify. [16] Human geography is much more likely to employ qualitative methods than physical. Increasingly, technical geographers are attempting to employ GIS methods to qualitative datasets. [16] [80] Qualitative cartography A compound chorochromatic map of Indo-Aryan (Indic) languages Qualitative cartography employs many of the same software and techniques as quantitative. [80] It may be employed to inform on map practices, or to visualize perspectives and ideas that are not strictly quantitative in nature. [80] [16] An example of a form of qualitative cartography is a Chorochromatic map of nominal data, such as land cover or dominant language group in an area. [81] Another example is a deep map , or maps that combine geography and storytelling to produce a product with greater information than a two-dimensional image of places, names, and topography. [82] [83] This approach offers more inclusive strategies than more traditional cartographic approaches for connecting the complex layers that makeup places. [83] Ethnography Main article: Ethnography Ethnographical research techniques are used by human geographers. [84] In cultural geography , there is a tradition of employing qualitative research techniques, also used in anthropology and sociology. Participant observation and in-depth interviews provide human geographers with qualitative data. Geopoetics Main article: Geopoetics Geopoetics is an interdisciplinary approach that combines geography and poetry to explore the interconnectedness between humans, space, place, and the environment. [85] [86] Geopoetics is employed as a mixed methods tool to explain the implications of geographic research. [87] It is often employed to address and communicate the implications of complex topics, such as the anthropocene . [88] [89] [90] [91] [92] Interviews Main article: Interview (research) Geographers employ interviews to gather data and acquire valuable understandings from individuals or groups regarding their encounters, outlooks, and opinions concerning spatial phenomena. [93] [94] Interviews can be carried out through various mediums, including face-to-face interactions, phone conversations, online platforms, or written exchanges. [46] Geographers typically adopt a structured or semi-structured approach during interviews involving specific questions or discussion points when utilized for research purposes. [93] These questions are designed to extract focused information about the research topic while being flexible enough to allow participants to express their experiences and viewpoints, such as through open-ended questions. [93] History Main article: History of geography The concept of geography is present in all cultures, and therefore the history of the discipline is a series of competing narratives, with concepts emerging at various points across space and time. [95] The oldest known world maps date back to ancient Babylon from the 9th century BC. [96] The best known Babylonian world map, however, is the Imago Mundi of 600 BC. [97] The map as reconstructed by Eckhard Unger shows Babylon on the Euphrates , surrounded by a circular landmass showing Assyria , Urartu , and several cities, in turn surrounded by a "bitter river" ( Oceanus ), with seven islands arranged around it so as to form a seven-pointed star. [98] The accompanying text mentions seven outer regions beyond the encircling ocean. The descriptions of five of them have survived. [99] In contrast to the Imago Mundi, an earlier Babylonian world map dating back to the 9th century BC depicted Babylon as being further north from the center of the world, though it is not certain what that center was supposed to represent. [96] Etching of an ancient seal identified as Eratosthenes. Philipp Daniel Lippert , Dactyliothec, 1767. The ideas of Anaximander (c. 610–545 BC): considered by later Greek writers to be the true founder of geography, come to us through fragments quoted by his successors. [100] Anaximander is credited with the invention of the gnomon , the simple, yet efficient Greek instrument that allowed the early measurement of latitude . [100] Thales is also credited with the prediction of eclipses. The foundations of geography can be traced to ancient cultures, such as the ancient, medieval, and early modern Chinese . The Greeks , who were the first to explore geography as both art and science, achieved this through Cartography , Philosophy , and Literature , or through Mathematics . There is some debate about who was the first person to assert that the Earth is spherical in shape, with the credit going either to Parmenides or Pythagoras . Anaxagoras was able to demonstrate that the profile of the Earth was circular by explaining eclipses . However, he still believed that the Earth was a flat disk, as did many of his contemporaries. One of the first estimates of the radius of the Earth was made by Eratosthenes . [101] The first rigorous system of latitude and longitude lines is credited to Hipparchus . He employed a sexagesimal system that was derived from Babylonian mathematics . The meridians were subdivided into 360°, with each degree further subdivided into 60 ( minutes ). To measure the longitude at different locations on Earth, he suggested using eclipses to determine the relative difference in time. [102] The extensive mapping by the Romans as they explored new lands would later provide a high level of information for Ptolemy to construct detailed atlases . He extended the work of Hipparchus , using a grid system on his maps and adopting a length of 56.5 miles for a degree. [103] From the 3rd century onwards, Chinese methods of geographical study and writing of geographical literature became much more comprehensive than what was found in Europe at the time (until the 13th century). [104] Chinese geographers such as Liu An , Pei Xiu , Jia Dan , Shen Kuo , Fan Chengda , Zhou Daguan , and Xu Xiake wrote important treatises, yet by the 17th century advanced ideas and methods of Western-style geography were adopted in China. The Ptolemy world map , reconstituted from Ptolemy 's Geographia, written c. 150 During the Middle Ages , the fall of the Roman empire led to a shift in the evolution of geography from Europe to the Islamic world . [104] Muslim geographers such as Muhammad al-Idrisi produced detailed world maps (such as Tabula Rogeriana ), while other geographers such as Yaqut al-Hamawi , Abu Rayhan Biruni , Ibn Battuta , and Ibn Khaldun provided detailed accounts of their journeys and the geography of the regions they visited. Turkish geographer Mahmud al-Kashgari drew a world map on a linguistic basis, and later so did Piri Reis ( Piri Reis map ). Further, Islamic scholars translated and interpreted the earlier works of the Romans and the Greeks and established the House of Wisdom in Baghdad for this purpose. [105] Abū Zayd al-Balkhī , originally from Balkh , founded the "Balkhī school" of terrestrial mapping in Baghdad . [106] Suhrāb, a late tenth century Muslim geographer accompanied a book of geographical coordinates, with instructions for making a rectangular world map with equirectangular projection or cylindrical equidistant projection. [107] Abu Rayhan Biruni (976–1048) first described a polar equi- azimuthal equidistant projection of the celestial sphere . [108] He was regarded as the most skilled when it came to mapping cities and measuring the distances between them, which he did for many cities in the Middle East and the Indian subcontinent . He often combined astronomical readings and mathematical equations to develop methods of pin-pointing locations by recording degrees of latitude and longitude . He also developed similar techniques when it came to measuring the heights of mountains, depths of the valleys , and expanse of the horizon . He also discussed human geography and the planetary habitability of the Earth. He also calculated the latitude of Kath, Khwarezm , using the maximum altitude of the Sun, and solved a complex geodesic equation to accurately compute the Earth's circumference , which was close to modern values of the Earth's circumference. [109] His estimate of 6,339.9 km for the Earth radius was only 16.8 km less than the modern value of 6,356.7 km. In contrast to his predecessors, who measured the Earth's circumference by sighting the Sun simultaneously from two different locations, al-Biruni developed a new method of using trigonometric calculations based on the angle between a plain and mountain top, which yielded more accurate measurements of the Earth's circumference, and made it possible for it to be measured by a single person from a single location. [110] The European Age of Discovery during the 16th and the 17th centuries, where many new lands were discovered and accounts by European explorers such as Christopher Columbus , Marco Polo , and James Cook revived a desire for both accurate geographic detail and more solid theoretical foundations in Europe. The problem facing both explorers and geographers was finding the latitude and longitude of a geographic location. The problem of latitude was solved long ago, but that of longitude remained; agreeing on what zero meridians should be was only part of the problem. It was left to John Harrison to solve it by inventing the chronometer H-4 in 1760, and later in 1884 for the International Meridian Conference to adopt by convention the Greenwich meridian as zero meridians. [109] The 18th and 19th centuries were the times when geography became recognized as a discrete academic discipline , and became part of a typical university curriculum in Europe (especially Paris and Berlin ). The development of many geographic societies also occurred during the 19th century, with the foundations of the Société de Géographie in 1821, the Royal Geographical Society in 1830, Russian Geographical Society in 1845, American Geographical Society in 1851, and the National Geographic Society in 1888. The influence of Immanuel Kant , Alexander von Humboldt , Carl Ritter , and Paul Vidal de la Blache can be seen as a major turning point in geography from philosophy to an academic subject. [111] [112] [113] [114] [115] Waldo Tobler in front of the Newberry Library. Chicago, November 2007 Over the past two centuries, the advancements in technology with computers have led to the development of geomatics and new practices such as participant observation and geostatistics being incorporated into geography's portfolio of tools. In the West during the 20th century, the discipline of geography went through four major phases: environmental determinism , regional geography , the quantitative revolution , and critical geography . The strong interdisciplinary links between geography and the sciences of geology and botany , as well as economics, sociology, and demographics , have also grown greatly, especially as a result of earth system science that seeks to understand the world in a holistic view. New concepts and philosophies have emerged from the rapid advancement of computers, quantitative methods, and interdisciplinary approaches. In 1970, Waldo Tobler proposed the first law of geography , "everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things." [35] [36] This law summarizes the first assumption geographers make about the world. Notable geographers
Sports Medicine Training in internal medicine (as opposed to surgical training), varies considerably across the world: see the articles on medical education for more details. In North America, it requires at least three years of residency training after medical school, which can then be followed by a one- to three-year fellowship in the subspecialties listed above. In general, resident work hours in medicine are less than those in surgery, averaging about 60 hours per week in the US. This difference does not apply in the UK where all doctors are now required by law to work less than 48 hours per week on average. Diagnostic specialties[ edit ] Clinical laboratory sciences are the clinical diagnostic services that apply laboratory techniques to diagnosis and management of patients. In the United States, these services are supervised by a pathologist. The personnel that work in these medical laboratory departments are technically trained staff who do not hold medical degrees, but who usually hold an undergraduate medical technology degree, who actually perform the tests , assays , and procedures needed for providing the specific services. Subspecialties include transfusion medicine , cellular pathology , clinical chemistry , hematology , clinical microbiology and clinical immunology . Clinical neurophysiology is concerned with testing the physiology or function of the central and peripheral aspects of the nervous system. These kinds of tests can be divided into recordings of: (1) spontaneous or continuously running electrical activity, or (2) stimulus evoked responses. Subspecialties include electroencephalography , electromyography , evoked potential , nerve conduction study and polysomnography . Sometimes these tests are performed by techs without a medical degree, but the interpretation of these tests is done by a medical professional. Diagnostic radiology is concerned with imaging of the body, e.g. by x-rays , x-ray computed tomography , ultrasonography , and nuclear magnetic resonance tomography . Interventional radiologists can access areas in the body under imaging for an intervention or diagnostic sampling. Nuclear medicine is concerned with studying human organ systems by administering radiolabelled substances (radiopharmaceuticals) to the body, which can then be imaged outside the body by a gamma camera or a PET scanner. Each radiopharmaceutical consists of two parts: a tracer that is specific for the function under study (e.g., neurotransmitter pathway, metabolic pathway, blood flow, or other), and a radionuclide (usually either a gamma-emitter or a positron emitter). There is a degree of overlap between nuclear medicine and radiology, as evidenced by the emergence of combined devices such as the PET/CT scanner. Pathology as a medical specialty is the branch of medicine that deals with the study of diseases and the morphologic, physiologic changes produced by them. As a diagnostic specialty, pathology can be considered the basis of modern scientific medical knowledge and plays a large role in evidence-based medicine . Many modern molecular tests such as flow cytometry , polymerase chain reaction (PCR), immunohistochemistry , cytogenetics , gene rearrangements studies and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) fall within the territory of pathology. Other major specialties[ edit ] The following are some major medical specialties that do not directly fit into any of the above-mentioned groups: Anesthesiology (also known as anaesthetics): concerned with the perioperative management of the surgical patient. The anesthesiologist's role during surgery is to prevent derangement in the vital organs' (i.e. brain, heart, kidneys) functions and postoperative pain. Outside of the operating room, the anesthesiology physician also serves the same function in the labor and delivery ward, and some are specialized in critical medicine. Emergency medicine is concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of acute or life-threatening conditions, including trauma , surgical, medical, pediatric, and psychiatric emergencies. Family medicine , family practice , general practice or primary care is, in many countries, the first port-of-call for patients with non-emergency medical problems. Family physicians often provide services across a broad range of settings including office based practices, emergency department coverage, inpatient care, and nursing home care. Gynecologist Michel Akotionga of Ouagadougou , Burkina Faso Medical genetics is concerned with the diagnosis and management of hereditary disorders. Neurology is concerned with diseases of the nervous system. In the UK, neurology is a subspecialty of general medicine. Obstetrics and gynecology (often abbreviated as OB/GYN (American English) or Obs & Gynae (British English)) are concerned respectively with childbirth and the female reproductive and associated organs. Reproductive medicine and fertility medicine are generally practiced by gynecological specialists. Pediatrics (AE) or paediatrics (BE) is devoted to the care of infants, children, and adolescents. Like internal medicine, there are many pediatric subspecialties for specific age ranges, organ systems, disease classes, and sites of care delivery. Pharmaceutical medicine is the medical scientific discipline concerned with the discovery, development, evaluation, registration, monitoring and medical aspects of marketing of medicines for the benefit of patients and public health. Physical medicine and rehabilitation (or physiatry) is concerned with functional improvement after injury, illness, or congenital disorders . Podiatric medicine is the study of, diagnosis, and medical & surgical treatment of disorders of the foot, ankle, lower limb, hip and lower back. Preventive medicine is the branch of medicine concerned with preventing disease. Community health or public health is an aspect of health services concerned with threats to the overall health of a community based on population health analysis. Psychiatry is the branch of medicine concerned with the bio-psycho-social study of the etiology , diagnosis, treatment and prevention of cognitive , perceptual , emotional and behavioral disorders. Related fields include psychotherapy and clinical psychology . Some interdisciplinary sub-specialties of medicine include: Addiction medicine deals with the treatment of addiction. Aerospace medicine deals with medical problems related to flying and space travel . Biomedical Engineering is a field dealing with the application of engineering principles to medical practice. Clinical pharmacology is concerned with how systems of therapeutics interact with patients. Conservation medicine studies the relationship between human and non-human animal health, and environmental conditions. Also known as ecological medicine, environmental medicine , or medical geology . Disaster medicine deals with medical aspects of emergency preparedness, disaster mitigation and management. Diving medicine (or hyperbaric medicine ) is the prevention and treatment of diving-related problems. Evolutionary medicine is a perspective on medicine derived through applying evolutionary theory . Forensic medicine deals with medical questions in legal context, such as determination of the time and cause of death, type of weapon used to inflict trauma, reconstruction of the facial features using remains of deceased (skull) thus aiding identification. Gender-based medicine studies the biological and physiological differences between the human sexes and how that affects differences in disease. Health informatics is a relatively recent field that deal with the application of computers and information technology to medicine. Hospice and Palliative Medicine is a relatively modern branch of clinical medicine that deals with pain and symptom relief and emotional support in patients with terminal illnesses including cancer and heart failure . Hospital medicine is the general medical care of hospitalized patients. Physicians whose primary professional focus is hospital medicine are called hospitalists in the United States and Canada . The term Most Responsible Physician (MRP) or attending physician is also used interchangeably to describe this role. Laser medicine involves the use of lasers in the diagnostics or treatment of various conditions. Many other health science fields, e.g. dietetics Medical ethics deals with ethical and moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of medicine. Medical humanities includes the humanities ( literature , philosophy , ethics , history and religion), social science ( anthropology , cultural studies , psychology , sociology ), and the arts ( literature , theater, film, and visual arts ) and their application to medical education and practice. Nosokinetics is the science/subject of measuring and modelling the process of care in health and social care systems. Nosology is the classification of diseases for various purposes. Occupational medicine is the provision of health advice to organizations and individuals to ensure that the highest standards of health and safety at work can be achieved and maintained. Pain management (also called pain medicine , or algiatry) is the medical discipline concerned with the relief of pain. Pharmacogenomics is a form of individualized medicine. Podiatric medicine is the study of, diagnosis, and medical treatment of disorders of the foot, ankle, lower limb, hip and lower back. Sexual medicine is concerned with diagnosing, assessing and treating all disorders related to sexuality. Sports medicine deals with the treatment and prevention and rehabilitation of sports/exercise injuries such as muscle spasms , muscle tears , injuries to ligaments (ligament tears or ruptures) and their repair in athletes , amateur and professional . Therapeutics is the field, more commonly referenced in earlier periods of history, of the various remedies that can be used to treat disease and promote health. [31] Travel medicine or emporiatrics deals with health problems of international travelers or travelers across highly different environments. Tropical medicine deals with the prevention and treatment of tropical diseases. It is studied separately in temperate climates where those diseases are quite unfamiliar to medical practitioners and their local clinical needs. Urgent care focuses on delivery of unscheduled, walk-in care outside of the hospital emergency department for injuries and illnesses that are not severe enough to require care in an emergency department. In some jurisdictions this function is combined with the emergency department. Veterinary medicine ; veterinarians apply similar techniques as physicians to the care of non-human animals. Wilderness medicine entails the practice of medicine in the wild, where conventional medical facilities may not be available. Education and legal controls[ edit ] Main articles: Medical education and Medical license Medical students learning about stitches Medical education and training varies around the world. It typically involves entry level education at a university medical school , followed by a period of supervised practice or internship , or residency . This can be followed by postgraduate vocational training. A variety of teaching methods have been employed in medical education, still itself a focus of active research. In Canada and the United States of America, a Doctor of Medicine degree, often abbreviated M.D., or a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree, often abbreviated as D.O. and unique to the United States, must be completed in and delivered from a recognized university. Since knowledge, techniques, and medical technology continue to evolve at a rapid rate, many regulatory authorities require continuing medical education . Medical practitioners upgrade their knowledge in various ways, including medical journals , seminars, conferences, and online programs. A database of objectives covering medical knowledge, as suggested by national societies across the United States, can be searched at http://data.medobjectives.marian.edu/ Archived 4 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine . [32] Headquarters of the Organización Médica Colegial de España , which regulates the medical profession in Spain In most countries, it is a legal requirement for a medical doctor to be licensed or registered. In general, this entails a medical degree from a university and accreditation by a medical board or an equivalent national organization, which may ask the applicant to pass exams. This restricts the considerable legal authority of the medical profession to physicians that are trained and qualified by national standards. It is also intended as an assurance to patients and as a safeguard against charlatans that practice inadequate medicine for personal gain. While the laws generally require medical doctors to be trained in "evidence based", Western, or Hippocratic Medicine, they are not intended to discourage different paradigms of health. In the European Union, the profession of doctor of medicine is regulated. A profession is said to be regulated when access and exercise is subject to the possession of a specific professional qualification. The regulated professions database contains a list of regulated professions for doctor of medicine in the EU member states, EEA countries and Switzerland. This list is covered by the Directive 2005/36/EC. Doctors who are negligent or intentionally harmful in their care of patients can face charges of medical malpractice and be subject to civil, criminal, or professional sanctions.
Toggle the table of contents Engineering From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Applied science and research e Engineering is the practice of using natural science , mathematics , and the engineering design process [1] to solve technical problems, increase efficiency and productivity, and improve systems. Modern engineering comprises many subfields which include designing and improving infrastructure , machinery , vehicles , electronics , materials , and energy systems. [2] The discipline of engineering encompasses a broad range of more specialized fields of engineering , each with a more specific emphasis on particular areas of applied mathematics , applied science , and types of application. See glossary of engineering . The term engineering is derived from the Latin ingenium, meaning "cleverness" and ingeniare, meaning "to contrive, devise". [3] Definition The American Engineers' Council for Professional Development (ECPD, the predecessor of ABET ) [4] has defined "engineering" as: The creative application of scientific principles to design or develop structures, machines, apparatus, or manufacturing processes, or works utilizing them singly or in combination; or to construct or operate the same with full cognizance of their design; or to forecast their behavior under specific operating conditions; all as respects an intended function, economics of operation and safety to life and property. [5] [6] History Main article: History of engineering Relief map of the Citadel of Lille , designed in 1668 by Vauban , the foremost military engineer of his age Engineering has existed since ancient times, when humans devised inventions such as the wedge, lever, wheel and pulley, etc. The term engineering is derived from the word engineer, which itself dates back to the 14th century when an engine'er (literally, one who builds or operates a siege engine ) referred to "a constructor of military engines". [7] In this context, now obsolete, an "engine" referred to a military machine, i.e., a mechanical contraption used in war (for example, a catapult ). Notable examples of the obsolete usage which have survived to the present day are military engineering corps, e.g., the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . The word "engine" itself is of even older origin, ultimately deriving from the Latin ingenium ( c. 1250), meaning "innate quality, especially mental power, hence a clever invention." [8] Later, as the design of civilian structures, such as bridges and buildings, matured as a technical discipline, the term civil engineering [6] entered the lexicon as a way to distinguish between those specializing in the construction of such non-military projects and those involved in the discipline of military engineering . Ancient era The Ancient Romans built aqueducts to bring a steady supply of clean and fresh water to cities and towns in the empire. The pyramids in ancient Egypt , ziggurats of Mesopotamia , the Acropolis and Parthenon in Greece, the Roman aqueducts , Via Appia and Colosseum, Teotihuacán , and the Brihadeeswarar Temple of Thanjavur , among many others, stand as a testament to the ingenuity and skill of ancient civil and military engineers. Other monuments, no longer standing, such as the Hanging Gardens of Babylon and the Pharos of Alexandria , were important engineering achievements of their time and were considered among the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World . The six classic simple machines were known in the ancient Near East . The wedge and the inclined plane (ramp) were known since prehistoric times. [9] The wheel , along with the wheel and axle mechanism, was invented in Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) during the 5th millennium BC. [10] The lever mechanism first appeared around 5,000 years ago in the Near East , where it was used in a simple balance scale , [11] and to move large objects in ancient Egyptian technology . [12] The lever was also used in the shadoof water-lifting device, the first crane machine, which appeared in Mesopotamia c. 3000 BC, [11] and then in ancient Egyptian technology c. 2000 BC. [13] The earliest evidence of pulleys date back to Mesopotamia in the early 2nd millennium BC, [14] and ancient Egypt during the Twelfth Dynasty (1991–1802 BC). [15] The screw , the last of the simple machines to be invented, [16] first appeared in Mesopotamia during the Neo-Assyrian period (911–609) BC. [14] The Egyptian pyramids were built using three of the six simple machines, the inclined plane, the wedge, and the lever, to create structures like the Great Pyramid of Giza . [17] The earliest civil engineer known by name is Imhotep . [6] As one of the officials of the Pharaoh , Djosèr , he probably designed and supervised the construction of the Pyramid of Djoser (the Step Pyramid ) at Saqqara in Egypt around 2630–2611 BC. [18] The earliest practical water-powered machines, the water wheel and watermill , first appeared in the Persian Empire , in what are now Iraq and Iran, by the early 4th century BC. [19] Kush developed the Sakia during the 4th century BC, which relied on animal power instead of human energy. [20] Hafirs were developed as a type of reservoir in Kush to store and contain water as well as boost irrigation. [21] Sappers were employed to build causeways during military campaigns. [22] Kushite ancestors built speos during the Bronze Age between 3700 and 3250 BC. [23] Bloomeries and blast furnaces were also created during the 7th centuries BC in Kush. [24] [25] [26] [27] Ancient Greece developed machines in both civilian and military domains. The Antikythera mechanism , an early known mechanical analog computer , [28] [29] and the mechanical inventions of Archimedes , are examples of Greek mechanical engineering. Some of Archimedes' inventions, as well as the Antikythera mechanism, required sophisticated knowledge of differential gearing or epicyclic gearing , two key principles in machine theory that helped design the gear trains of the Industrial Revolution, and are widely used in fields such as robotics and automotive engineering . [30] Ancient Chinese, Greek, Roman and Hunnic armies employed military machines and inventions such as artillery which was developed by the Greeks around the 4th century BC, [31] the trireme , the ballista and the catapult . In the Middle Ages, the trebuchet was developed. Middle Ages The earliest practical wind-powered machines, the windmill and wind pump , first appeared in the Muslim world during the Islamic Golden Age , in what are now Iran, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, by the 9th century AD. [32] [33] [34] [35] The earliest practical steam-powered machine was a steam jack driven by a steam turbine , described in 1551 by Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf in Ottoman Egypt . [36] [37] The cotton gin was invented in India by the 6th century AD, [38] and the spinning wheel was invented in the Islamic world by the early 11th century, [39] both of which were fundamental to the growth of the cotton industry . The spinning wheel was also a precursor to the spinning jenny , which was a key development during the early Industrial Revolution in the 18th century. [40] The earliest programmable machines were developed in the Muslim world. A music sequencer , a programmable musical instrument , was the earliest type of programmable machine. The first music sequencer was an automated flute player invented by the Banu Musa brothers, described in their Book of Ingenious Devices , in the 9th century. [41] [42] In 1206, Al-Jazari invented programmable automata / robots . He described four automaton musicians, including drummers operated by a programmable drum machine , where they could be made to play different rhythms and different drum patterns. [43] A water-powered mine hoist used for raising ore, c. 1556 Before the development of modern engineering, mathematics was used by artisans and craftsmen, such as millwrights , clockmakers , instrument makers and surveyors. Aside from these professions, universities were not believed to have had much practical significance to technology. [44] : 32 A standard reference for the state of mechanical arts during the Renaissance is given in the mining engineering treatise De re metallica (1556), which also contains sections on geology, mining, and chemistry. De re metallica was the standard chemistry reference for the next 180 years. [44] Modern era The application of the steam engine allowed coke to be substituted for charcoal in iron making, lowering the cost of iron, which provided engineers with a new material for building bridges. This bridge was made of cast iron , which was soon displaced by less brittle wrought iron as a structural material. The science of classical mechanics , sometimes called Newtonian mechanics, formed the scientific basis of much of modern engineering. [44] With the rise of engineering as a profession in the 18th century, the term became more narrowly applied to fields in which mathematics and science were applied to these ends. Similarly, in addition to military and civil engineering, the fields then known as the mechanic arts became incorporated into engineering. Canal building was an important engineering work during the early phases of the Industrial Revolution. [45] John Smeaton was the first self-proclaimed civil engineer and is often regarded as the "father" of civil engineering. He was an English civil engineer responsible for the design of bridges, canals, harbors, and lighthouses. He was also a capable mechanical engineer and an eminent physicist . Using a model water wheel, Smeaton conducted experiments for seven years, determining ways to increase efficiency. [46] : 127 Smeaton introduced iron axles and gears to water wheels. [44] : 69 Smeaton also made mechanical improvements to the Newcomen steam engine . Smeaton designed the third Eddystone Lighthouse (1755–59) where he pioneered the use of ' hydraulic lime ' (a form of mortar which will set under water) and developed a technique involving dovetailed blocks of granite in the building of the lighthouse. He is important in the history, rediscovery of, and development of modern cement , because he identified the compositional requirements needed to obtain "hydraulicity" in lime; work which led ultimately to the invention of Portland cement . Applied science led to the development of the steam engine. The sequence of events began with the invention of the barometer and the measurement of atmospheric pressure by Evangelista Torricelli in 1643, demonstration of the force of atmospheric pressure by Otto von Guericke using the Magdeburg hemispheres in 1656, laboratory experiments by Denis Papin , who built experimental model steam engines and demonstrated the use of a piston, which he published in 1707. Edward Somerset, 2nd Marquess of Worcester published a book of 100 inventions containing a method for raising waters similar to a coffee percolator . Samuel Morland , a mathematician and inventor who worked on pumps, left notes at the Vauxhall Ordinance Office on a steam pump design that Thomas Savery read. In 1698 Savery built a steam pump called "The Miner's Friend". It employed both vacuum and pressure. [47] Iron merchant Thomas Newcomen , who built the first commercial piston steam engine in 1712, was not known to have any scientific training. [46] : 32 Jumbo Jet The application of steam-powered cast iron blowing cylinders for providing pressurized air for blast furnaces lead to a large increase in iron production in the late 18th century. The higher furnace temperatures made possible with steam-powered blast allowed for the use of more lime in blast furnaces , which enabled the transition from charcoal to coke . [48] These innovations lowered the cost of iron, making horse railways and iron bridges practical. The puddling process , patented by Henry Cort in 1784 produced large scale quantities of wrought iron. Hot blast , patented by James Beaumont Neilson in 1828, greatly lowered the amount of fuel needed to smelt iron. With the development of the high pressure steam engine, the power to weight ratio of steam engines made practical steamboats and locomotives possible. [49] New steel making processes, such as the Bessemer process and the open hearth furnace, ushered in an area of heavy engineering in the late 19th century. One of the most famous engineers of the mid-19th century was Isambard Kingdom Brunel , who built railroads, dockyards and steamships. Offshore platform, Gulf of Mexico The Industrial Revolution created a demand for machinery with metal parts, which led to the development of several machine tools . Boring cast iron cylinders with precision was not possible until John Wilkinson invented his boring machine , which is considered the first machine tool . [50] Other machine tools included the screw cutting lathe , milling machine , turret lathe and the metal planer . Precision machining techniques were developed in the first half of the 19th century. These included the use of gigs to guide the machining tool over the work and fixtures to hold the work in the proper position. Machine tools and machining techniques capable of producing interchangeable parts lead to large scale factory production by the late 19th century. [51] The United States Census of 1850 listed the occupation of "engineer" for the first time with a count of 2,000. [52] There were fewer than 50 engineering graduates in the U.S. before 1865. In 1870 there were a dozen U.S. mechanical engineering graduates, with that number increasing to 43 per year in 1875. In 1890, there were 6,000 engineers in civil, mining , mechanical and electrical. [49] There was no chair of applied mechanism and applied mechanics at Cambridge until 1875, and no chair of engineering at Oxford until 1907. Germany established technical universities earlier. [53] The foundations of electrical engineering in the 1800s included the experiments of Alessandro Volta , Michael Faraday , Georg Ohm and others and the invention of the electric telegraph in 1816 and the electric motor in 1872. The theoretical work of James Maxwell (see: Maxwell's equations ) and Heinrich Hertz in the late 19th century gave rise to the field of electronics . The later inventions of the vacuum tube and the transistor further accelerated the development of electronics to such an extent that electrical and electronics engineers currently outnumber their colleagues of any other engineering specialty. [6] Chemical engineering developed in the late nineteenth century. [6] Industrial scale manufacturing demanded new materials and new processes and by 1880 the need for large scale production of chemicals was such that a new industry was created, dedicated to the development and large scale manufacturing of chemicals in new industrial plants. [6] The role of the chemical engineer was the design of these chemical plants and processes. [6] The solar furnace at Odeillo in the Pyrénées-Orientales in France can reach temperatures up to 3,500 °C (6,330 °F). Aeronautical engineering deals with aircraft design process design while aerospace engineering is a more modern term that expands the reach of the discipline by including spacecraft design. Its origins can be traced back to the aviation pioneers around the start of the 20th century although the work of Sir George Cayley has recently been dated as being from the last decade of the 18th century. Early knowledge of aeronautical engineering was largely empirical with some concepts and skills imported from other branches of engineering. [54] The first PhD in engineering (technically, applied science and engineering) awarded in the United States went to Josiah Willard Gibbs at Yale University in 1863; it was also the second PhD awarded in science in the U.S. [55] Only a decade after the successful flights by the Wright brothers , there was extensive development of aeronautical engineering through development of military aircraft that were used in World War I . Meanwhile, research to provide fundamental background science continued by combining theoretical physics with experiments. Main branches of engineering Hoover Dam Engineering is a broad discipline that is often broken down into several sub-disciplines. Although an engineer will usually be trained in a specific discipline, he or she may become multi-disciplined through experience. Engineering is often characterized as having four main branches: [56] [57] [58] chemical engineering, civil engineering, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering. Chemical engineering Main article: Chemical engineering Chemical engineering is the application of physics, chemistry, biology, and engineering principles in order to carry out chemical processes on a commercial scale, such as the manufacture of commodity chemicals , specialty chemicals , petroleum refining , microfabrication , fermentation , and biomolecule production . Civil engineering Main article: Civil engineering Civil engineering is the design and construction of public and private works, such as infrastructure (airports, roads, railways, water supply, and treatment etc.), bridges, tunnels, dams, and buildings. [59] [60] Civil engineering is traditionally broken into a number of sub-disciplines, including structural engineering , environmental engineering , and surveying . It is traditionally considered to be separate from military engineering . [61] Electrical engineering
Toggle the table of contents Architecture From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Product and process of planning, designing and constructing buildings and other structures For other uses, see Architecture (disambiguation) . In adding the dome to the Florence Cathedral ( Italy ) in the early 15th century, the architect Filippo Brunelleschi not only transformed the building and the city, but also the role and status of the architect . [1] [2] Architecture is the art and technique of designing and building, as distinguished from the skills associated with construction. [3] It is both the process and the product of sketching, conceiving, [4] planning , designing , and constructing buildings or other structures . [5] The term comes from Latin architectura ; from Ancient Greek ἀρχιτέκτων (arkhitéktōn) 'architect'; from ἀρχι- (arkhi-) 'chief', and τέκτων (téktōn) 'creator'. Architectural works, in the material form of buildings, are often perceived as cultural symbols and as works of art . Historical civilisations are often identified with their surviving architectural achievements. [6] The practice, which began in the prehistoric era , has been used as a way of expressing culture by civilizations on all seven continents . [7] For this reason, architecture is considered to be a form of art . Texts on architecture have been written since ancient times. The earliest surviving text on architectural theories is the 1st century AD treatise De architectura by the Roman architect Vitruvius , according to whom a good building embodies firmitas, utilitas, and venustas (durability, utility, and beauty). Centuries later, Leon Battista Alberti developed his ideas further, seeing beauty as an objective quality of buildings to be found in their proportions. In the 19th century, Louis Sullivan declared that " form follows function ". "Function" began to replace the classical "utility" and was understood to include not only practical but also aesthetic, psychological, and cultural dimensions. The idea of sustainable architecture was introduced in the late 20th century. Architecture began as rural, oral vernacular architecture that developed from trial and error to successful replication. Ancient urban architecture was preoccupied with building religious structures and buildings symbolizing the political power of rulers until Greek and Roman architecture shifted focus to civic virtues. Indian and Chinese architecture influenced forms all over Asia and Buddhist architecture in particular took diverse local flavors. During the Middle Ages , pan-European styles of Romanesque and Gothic cathedrals and abbeys emerged while the Renaissance favored Classical forms implemented by architects known by name. Later, the roles of architects and engineers became separated. Modern architecture began after World War I as an avant-garde movement that sought to develop a completely new style appropriate for a new post-war social and economic order focused on meeting the needs of the middle and working classes. Emphasis was put on modern techniques, materials, and simplified geometric forms, paving the way for high-rise superstructures. Many architects became disillusioned with modernism which they perceived as ahistorical and anti-aesthetic, and postmodern and contemporary architecture developed. Over the years, the field of architectural construction has branched out to include everything from ship design to interior decorating. Definitions The art and science of designing buildings and (some) nonbuilding structures . [8] The style of design and method of construction of buildings and other physical structures. [8] A unifying or coherent form or structure. [9] Knowledge of art, science, technology, and humanity. [8] The design activity of the architect, [8] from the macro-level ( urban design , landscape architecture ) to the micro-level (construction details and furniture). The practice of the architect , where architecture means offering or rendering professional services in connection with the design and construction of buildings, or built environments. [10] Theory Illustration of bracket arm clusters containing cantilevers from Yingzao Fashi , a text on architecture by Li Jue (1065–1110) Plan of the second floor (attic storey) of the Hôtel de Brionne in Paris – 1734. The philosophy of architecture is a branch of philosophy of art , dealing with aesthetic value of architecture, its semantics and in relation with development of culture . Many philosophers and theoreticians from Plato to Michel Foucault , Gilles Deleuze , [11] Robert Venturi and Ludwig Wittgenstein have concerned themselves with the nature of architecture and whether or not architecture is distinguished from building. Historic treatises The earliest surviving written work on the subject of architecture is De architectura by the Roman architect Vitruvius in the early 1st century AD. [12] According to Vitruvius, a good building should satisfy the three principles of firmitas, utilitas, venustas, [13] [14] commonly known by the original translation – firmness, commodity and delight. An equivalent in modern English would be: Durability – a building should stand up robustly and remain in good condition Utility – it should be suitable for the purposes for which it is used Beauty – it should be aesthetically pleasing According to Vitruvius, the architect should strive to fulfill each of these three attributes as well as possible. Leon Battista Alberti , who elaborates on the ideas of Vitruvius in his treatise, De re aedificatoria , saw beauty primarily as a matter of proportion, although ornament also played a part. For Alberti, the rules of proportion were those that governed the idealized human figure, the Golden mean . The most important aspect of beauty was, therefore, an inherent part of an object, rather than something applied superficially, and was based on universal, recognizable truths. The notion of style in the arts was not developed until the 16th century, with the writing of Giorgio Vasari . [15] By the 18th century, his Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects had been translated into Italian, French, Spanish, and English. In the 16th century, Italian Mannerist architect, painter and theorist Sebastiano Serlio wrote Tutte L'Opere D'Architettura et Prospetiva (Complete Works on Architecture and Perspective). This treatise exerted immense influence throughout Europe, being the first handbook that emphasized the practical rather than the theoretical aspects of architecture, and it was the first to catalog the five orders. [16] In the early 19th century, Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin wrote Contrasts (1836) that, as the title suggested, contrasted the modern, industrial world, which he disparaged, with an idealized image of neo-medieval world. Gothic architecture , Pugin believed, was the only "true Christian form of architecture." [17] The 19th-century English art critic, John Ruskin , in his Seven Lamps of Architecture , published 1849, was much narrower in his view of what constituted architecture. Architecture was the "art which so disposes and adorns the edifices raised by men ... that the sight of them" contributes "to his mental health, power, and pleasure". [18] For Ruskin, the aesthetic was of overriding significance. His work goes on to state that a building is not truly a work of architecture unless it is in some way "adorned". For Ruskin, a well-constructed, well-proportioned, functional building needed string courses or rustication , at the very least. [18] On the difference between the ideals of architecture and mere construction , the renowned 20th-century architect Le Corbusier wrote: "You employ stone, wood, and concrete, and with these materials you build houses and palaces: that is construction. Ingenuity is at work. But suddenly you touch my heart, you do me good. I am happy and I say: This is beautiful. That is Architecture". [19] Le Corbusier's contemporary Ludwig Mies van der Rohe is said to have stated in a 1959 interview that "architecture starts when you carefully put two bricks together. There it begins." [20] The National Congress of Brazil , designed by Oscar Niemeyer Modern concepts The notable 19th-century architect of skyscrapers , Louis Sullivan , promoted an overriding precept to architectural design: " Form follows function ". While the notion that structural and aesthetic considerations should be entirely subject to functionality was met with both popularity and skepticism, it had the effect of introducing the concept of "function" in place of Vitruvius' "utility". "Function" came to be seen as encompassing all criteria of the use, perception and enjoyment of a building, not only practical but also aesthetic, psychological and cultural. Nunzia Rondanini stated, "Through its aesthetic dimension architecture goes beyond the functional aspects that it has in common with other human sciences. Through its own particular way of expressing values , architecture can stimulate and influence social life without presuming that, in and of itself, it will promote social development.... To restrict the meaning of (architectural) formalism to art for art's sake is not only reactionary; it can also be a purposeless quest for perfection or originality which degrades form into a mere instrumentality". [21] Among the philosophies that have influenced modern architects and their approach to building design are Rationalism , Empiricism , Structuralism , Poststructuralism , Deconstruction and Phenomenology . In the late 20th century a new concept was added to those included in the compass of both structure and function, the consideration of sustainability , hence sustainable architecture . To satisfy the contemporary ethos a building should be constructed in a manner which is environmentally friendly in terms of the production of its materials, its impact upon the natural and built environment of its surrounding area and the demands that it makes upon the natural environment for heating, ventilation and cooling , water use , waste products and lighting . History In Norway : wood and elevated-level In Lesotho : rondavel stones In Romania : peasant houses in the Dimitrie Gusti National Village Museum ( Bucharest ) Building first evolved out of the dynamics between needs (shelter, security, worship, etc.) and means (available building materials and attendant skills). As human cultures developed and knowledge began to be formalized through oral traditions and practices, building became a craft , and "architecture" is the name given to the most highly formalized and respected versions of that craft. It is widely assumed that architectural success was the product of a process of trial and error, with progressively less trial and more replication as the results of the process proved increasingly satisfactory. What is termed vernacular architecture continues to be produced in many parts of the world. Prehistoric architecture Excavated dwellings at Skara Brae ( Mainland, Orkney , Scotland , UK) Early human settlements were mostly rural . Hence, Expending economies resulted in the creation of proto-cities or urban areas which in some cases grew and evolved very rapidly, such as that of Çatalhöyük in Anatolia and Mohenjo Daro of the Indus Valley Civilization in modern-day Pakistan . Neolithic settlements and "cities" include Göbekli Tepe and Çatalhöyük in Turkey, Jericho in the Levant, Mehrgarh in Pakistan, the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture settlements in Romania , Moldova and Ukraine , and in Scotland the far smaller Skara Brae , Orkney Islands Classical era Armenian Architecture : The Garni Temple from Garni (Armenia), c. 1 century AD In many ancient civilizations such as those of Egypt and Mesopotamia , architecture and urbanism reflected the constant engagement with the divine and the supernatural , and many ancient cultures resorted to monumentality in architecture to symbolically represent the political power of the ruler or the state itself. The architecture and urbanism of the Classical civilizations such as the Greek and the Roman evolved from civic ideals rather than religious or empirical ones and new building types emerged. As the Architectural "style" developed in the form of the Classical orders . Roman architecture was influenced by Greek architecture as they incorporated many Greek elements into their building practices. [22] Texts on architecture have been written since ancient times. These texts provided both general advice and specific formal prescriptions or canons. Some examples of canons are found in the writings of the 1st-century BC Roman architect Vitruvius. Some of the most important early examples of canonic architecture are religious. Asian architecture Khmer architecture : The Bakong (near Siem Reap , Cambodia ), earliest surviving Temple Mountain at Angkor, completed in 881 AD The architecture of different parts of Asia developed differently than Europe; and each of Buddhist, Hindu and Sikh architecture had different characteristics. Unlike Indian and Chinese architecture, which had great influence on the surrounding regions, Japanese architecture did not. Some Asian architecture showed great regional diversity such as Buddhist architecture , in particular. Moreover, other architectural achievements in Asia is the Hindu temple architecture , which developed from around the 5th century CE, is in theory governed by concepts laid down in the Shastras , and is concerned with expressing the macrocosm and the microcosm. In many Asian countries, pantheistic religion led to architectural forms that were designed specifically to enhance the natural landscape . Also, the grandest houses were relatively lightweight structures mainly using wood until recent times, and there are few survivals of great age. Buddhism was associated with a move to stone and brick religious structures, probably beginning as rock-cut architecture , which has often survived very well. Early Asian writings on architecture include the Kao Gong Ji of China from the 7th–5th centuries BC; the Shilpa Shastras of ancient India; Manjusri Vasthu Vidya Sastra of Sri Lanka and Araniko of Nepal . Islamic architecture Ottoman architecture : The interior side view of the main dome of the Selimiye Mosque in Edirne ( Turkey ) Islamic architecture began in the 7th century, incorporating architectural forms from the ancient Middle East and Byzantium , but also developing features to suit the religious and social needs of the society. Examples can be found throughout the Middle East, Turkey, North Africa, the Indian Sub-continent and in parts of Europe, such as Spain, Albania, and the Balkan States, as the result of the expansion of the Ottoman Empire . [23] [24] European medieval architecture Main article: Medieval architecture Armenian Architecture : Interior of Etchmiadzin Cathedral , the first cathedral in the world, founded 303 year AD. Romanesque architecture : Interior of the Durham Cathedral ( Durham , UK), 1093–1133 Gothic architecture: Stained glass windows of the Sainte-Chapelle in Paris, completed in 1248, mostly constructed between 1194 and 1220 In Europe during the Medieval period, guilds were formed by craftsmen to organize their trades and written contracts have survived, particularly in relation to ecclesiastical buildings. The role of architect was usually one with that of master mason, or Magister lathomorum as they are sometimes described in contemporary documents. The major architectural undertakings were the buildings of abbeys and cathedrals . From about 900 onward, the movements of both clerics and tradesmen carried architectural knowledge across Europe, resulting in the pan-European styles Romanesque and Gothic. Also, a significant part of the Middle Ages architectural heritage is numerous fortifications across the continent. From the Balkans to Spain, and from Malta to Estonia, these buildings represent an important part of European heritage. Renaissance architecture The Tempietto (Rome), by Donato Bramante , 1444–1514 The Hall of Perspective from Villa Farnesina (Rome), by Baldassare Peruzzi , 1505–1510 The Château de Chenonceau (France), by Philibert de l'Orme , 1576 In Renaissance Europe, from about 1400 onwards, there was a revival of Classical learning accompanied by the development of Renaissance humanism , which placed greater emphasis on the role of the individual in society than had been the case during the Medieval period. Buildings were ascribed to specific architects – Brunelleschi, Alberti , Michelangelo , Palladio – and the cult of the individual had begun. There was still no dividing line between artist , architect and engineer , or any of the related vocations, and the appellation was often one of regional preference. A revival of the Classical style in architecture was accompanied by a burgeoning of science and engineering, which affected the proportions and structure of buildings. At this stage, it was still possible for an artist to design a bridge as the level of structural calculations involved was within the scope of the generalist. Early modern and the industrial age 19th century industrial architecture : Les Halles (Paris), 1850s-destroyed in 1971, by Victor Baltard Orientalist architecture : The Éden-Théâtre (Paris), early 1880s – demolished in 1895, by William Klein and Albert Duclos Revivalist architecture of a national style (in this case Romanian Revival ): The C.N. Câmpeanu House on Bulevardul Dacia (Bucharest), c. 1923, by Constantin Nănescu [25] Art Nouveau architecture : The Entrance of the Castel Béranger (Paris), 1895–1898, by Hector Guimard The emerging knowledge in scientific fields and the rise of new materials and technology, architecture and engineering began to separate, and the architect began to concentrate on aesthetics and the humanist aspects, often at the expense of technical aspects of building design. There was also the rise of the "gentleman architect" who usually dealt with wealthy clients and concentrated predominantly on visual qualities derived usually from historical prototypes, typified by the many country houses of Great Britain that were created in the Neo Gothic or Scottish baronial styles. Formal architectural training in the 19th century, for example at École des Beaux-Arts in France, gave much emphasis to the production of beautiful drawings and little to context and feasibility. Meanwhile, the Industrial Revolution laid open the door for mass production and consumption. Aesthetics became a criterion for the middle class as ornamented products, once within the province of expensive craftsmanship, became cheaper under machine production. Vernacular architecture became increasingly ornamental. Housebuilders could use current architectural design in their work by combining features found in pattern books and architectural journals. Modernism International Style : The Glaspaleis ( Heerlen , the Netherlands), 1934–1935, by Frits Peutz and Philip Johnson Around the beginning of the 20th century, general dissatisfaction with the emphasis on revivalist architecture and elaborate decoration gave rise to many new lines of thought that served as precursors to Modern architecture. Notable among these is the Deutscher Werkbund , formed in 1907 to produce better quality machine-made objects. The rise of the profession of industrial design is usually placed here. Following this lead, the Bauhaus school, founded in Weimar , Germany in 1919, redefined the architectural bounds prior set throughout history, viewing the creation of a building as the ultimate synthesis – the apex – of art, craft, and technology. When modern architecture was first practiced, it was an avant-garde movement with moral, philosophical, and aesthetic underpinnings. Immediately after World War I , pioneering modernist architects sought to develop a completely new style appropriate for a new post-war social and economic order, focused on meeting the needs of the middle and working classes. They rejected the architectural practice of the academic refinement of historical styles which served the rapidly declining aristocratic order. The approach of the Modernist architects was to reduce buildings to pure forms, removing historical references and ornament in favor of functional details. Buildings displayed their functional and structural elements, exposing steel beams and concrete surfaces instead of hiding them behind decorative forms. Architects such as Frank Lloyd Wright developed organic architecture , in which the form was defined by its environment and purpose, with an aim to promote harmony between human habitation and the natural world with prime examples being Robie House and Fallingwater . Architects such as Mies van der Rohe , Philip Johnson and Marcel Breuer worked to create beauty based on the inherent qualities of building materials and modern construction techniques, trading traditional historic forms for simplified geometric forms, celebrating the new means and methods made possible by the Industrial Revolution , including steel-frame construction, which gave birth to high-rise superstructures. Fazlur Rahman Khan 's development of the tube structure was a technological break-through in building ever higher. By mid-century, Modernism had morphed into the International Style , an aesthetic epitomized in many ways by the Twin Towers of New York's World Trade Center designed by Minoru Yamasaki . Postmodernism The Dancing House ( Prague , Czech Republic ), 1996, by Vlado Milunić and Frank Gehry Many architects resisted modernism , finding it devoid of the decorative richness of historical styles. As the first generation of modernists began to die after World War II , the second generation of architects including Paul Rudolph , Marcel Breuer , and Eero Saarinen tried to expand the aesthetics of modernism with Brutalism , buildings with expressive sculpture façades made of unfinished concrete. But an even younger postwar generation critiqued modernism and Brutalism for being too austere, standardized, monotone, and not taking into account the richness of human experience offered in historical buildings across time and in different places and cultures. One such reaction to the cold aesthetic of modernism and Brutalism is the school of metaphoric architecture , which includes such things as bio morphism and zoomorphic architecture , both using nature as the primary source of inspiration and design. While it is considered by some to be merely an aspect of postmodernism , others consider it to be a school in its own right and a later development of expressionist architecture . [27] Beginning in the late 1950s and 1960s, architectural phenomenology emerged as an important movement in the early reaction against modernism, with architects like Charles Moore in the United States, Christian Norberg-Schulz in Norway, and Ernesto Nathan Rogers and Vittorio Gregotti , Michele Valori , Bruno Zevi in Italy, who collectively popularized an interest in a new contemporary architecture aimed at expanding human experience using historical buildings as models and precedents. [28] Postmodernism produced a style that combined contemporary building technology and cheap materials, with the aesthetics of older pre-modern and non-modern styles, from high classical architecture to popular or vernacular regional building styles. Robert Venturi famously defined postmodern architecture as a "decorated shed" (an ordinary building which is functionally designed inside and embellished on the outside) and upheld it against modernist and brutalist "ducks" (buildings with unnecessarily expressive tectonic forms). [29] Architecture today The Library and Learning Center of the University of Vienna ( Vienna , Austria), 2008, by Zaha Hadid The Isbjerget housing project ( Aarhus , Denmark), inspired by form and color of icebergs, 2013, by CEBRA , JDS Architects , Louis Paillard, and SeARCH Since the 1980s, as the complexity of buildings began to increase (in terms of structural systems, services, energy and technologies), the field of architecture became multi-disciplinary with specializations for each project type, technological expertise or project delivery methods. Moreover, there has been an increased separation of the 'design' architect [Notes 1] from the 'project' architect who ensures that the project meets the required standards and deals with matters of liability. [Notes 2] The preparatory processes for the design of any large building have become increasingly complicated, and require preliminary studies of such matters as durability, sustainability, quality, money, and compliance with local laws. A large structure can no longer be the design of one person but must be the work of many. Modernism and Postmodernism have been criticized by some members of the architectural profession who feel that successful architecture is not a personal, philosophical, or aesthetic pursuit by individualists; rather it has to consider everyday needs of people and use technology to create livable environments, with the design process being informed by studies of behavioral, environmental, and social sciences. Environmental sustainability has become a mainstream issue, with a profound effect on the architectural profession. Many developers, those who support the financing of buildings, have become educated to encourage the facilitation of environmentally sustainable design, rather than solutions based primarily on immediate cost. Major examples of this can be found in passive solar building design , greener roof designs , biodegradable materials, and more attention to a structure's energy usage. This major shift in architecture has also changed architecture schools to focus more on the environment. There has been an acceleration in the number of buildings that seek to meet green building sustainable design principles. Sustainable practices that were at the core of vernacular architecture increasingly provide inspiration for environmentally and socially sustainable contemporary techniques. [30] The U.S. Green Building Council's LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) rating system has been instrumental in this. [31] [ quantify ] Concurrently, the recent movements of New Urbanism , Metaphoric architecture , Complementary architecture and New Classical architecture promote a sustainable approach towards construction that appreciates and develops smart growth , architectural tradition and classical design . [32] [33] This in contrast to modernist and globally uniform architecture, as well as leaning against solitary housing estates and suburban sprawl . [34] Glass curtain walls, which were the hallmark of the ultra modern urban life in many countries surfaced even in developing countries like Nigeria where international styles had been represented since the mid 20th Century mostly because of the leanings of foreign-trained architects. [35] Types Stourhead in Wiltshire , England, designed by Henry Hoare (1705–1785) Residential architecture Residential architecture is the design of functional fits the user's lifestyle while adhering to the building codes and zoning laws. Commercial architecture Commercial architecture is the design of commercial buildings that serves the needs of businesses, the government and religious institutions. [36] Industrial architecture Main article: Industrial architecture Industrial architecture is the design of specialized industrial buildings whose primary focus is designing buildings that are can fulfill its function while ensuring the safe movement of labor and goods in the facility. Landscape architecture Main article: Landscape architecture Landscape architecture is the design of outdoor public areas, landmarks, and structures to achieve environmental, social-behavioral, or aesthetic outcomes. [37] It involves the systematic investigation of existing social, ecological, and soil conditions and processes in the landscape, and the design of interventions that will produce the desired outcome. The scope of the profession includes landscape design ; site planning ; stormwater management ; environmental restoration ; parks and recreation planning; visual resource management; green infrastructure planning and provision; and private estate and residence landscape master planning and design; all at varying scales of design, planning and management. A practitioner in the profession of landscape architecture is called a landscape architect . Interior architecture Main article: Interior architecture Charles Rennie Mackintosh – Music Room 1901 Interior architecture is the design of a space which has been created by structural boundaries and the human interaction within these boundaries. It can also be the initial design and plan for use, then later redesigned to accommodate a changed purpose, or a significantly revised design for adaptive reuse of the building shell. [38] The latter is often part of sustainable architecture practices, conserving resources through "recycling" a structure by adaptive redesign. Generally referred to as the spatial art of environmental design, form and practice, interior architecture is the process through which the interiors of buildings are designed, concerned with all aspects of the human uses of structural spaces. Urban design Main article: Urban design Urban design is the process of designing and shaping the physical features of cities, towns, and villages. In contrast to architecture, which focuses on the design of individual buildings, urban design deals with the larger scale of groups of buildings, streets and public spaces, whole neighborhoods and districts, and entire cities, with the goal of making urban areas functional, attractive, and sustainable. [39] Urban design is an interdisciplinary field that uses elements of many built environment professions, including landscape architecture , urban planning , architecture, civil engineering and municipal engineering . [40] It is common for professionals in all these disciplines to practice urban design. In more recent times different sub-subfields of urban design have emerged such as strategic urban design, landscape urbanism , water-sensitive urban design , and sustainable urbanism . Other types of architecture Main article: Naval architecture Body plan of a ship showing the hull form Naval architecture, also known as naval engineering, is an engineering discipline dealing with the engineering design process , shipbuilding , maintenance, and operation of marine vessels and structures. [41] [42] Naval architecture involves basic and applied research, design, development, design evaluation and calculations during all stages of the life of a marine vehicle. Preliminary design of the vessel, its detailed design, construction , trials , operation and maintenance, launching and dry-docking are the main activities involved. Ship design calculations are also required for ships being modified (by means of conversion, rebuilding, modernization, or repair). Naval architecture also involves the formulation of safety regulations and damage control rules and the approval and certification of ship designs to meet statutory and non-statutory requirements. Metaphorical "architectures" "Architecture" is used as a metaphor for many modern techniques or fields for structuring abstractions. These include: Computer architecture , a set of rules and methods that describe the functionality, organization, and implementation of computer systems , with software architecture , hardware architecture and network architecture covering more specific aspects. Business architecture , defined as "a blueprint of the enterprise that provides a common understanding of the organization and is used to align strategic objectives and tactical demands", [43] Enterprise architecture is another term. System architecture a conceptual model that defines the structure , behavior , and more views of any type of system . [44] Seismic architecture Main article: Earthquake engineering The term ' seismic architecture ' or 'earthquake architecture' was first introduced in 1985 by Robert Reitherman. [45] The phrase "earthquake architecture" is used to describe a degree of architectural expression of earthquake resistance or implication of architectural configuration, form or style in earthquake resistance. It is also used to describe buildings in which seismic design considerations impacted its architecture. It may be considered a new aesthetic approach in designing structures in seismic prone areas. [46] The wide breadth of expressive possibilities ranges from metaphorical uses of seismic issues, to the more straightforward exposure of seismic technology. While outcomes of an earthquake architecture can be very diverse in their physical manifestations, architectural expression of seismic principles can also take many forms and levels of sophistication. [47] See also
Toggle the table of contents Computer science From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of computation For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation) . Fundamental areas of computer science Computer science is the study of computation , information , and automation . [1] [2] [3] Computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms , theory of computation , and information theory ) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software ). [4] [5] [6] Though more often considered an academic discipline , computer science is closely related to computer programming . [7] Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science. [8] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and for preventing security vulnerabilities . Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. Human–computer interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems , networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems . Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated equipment. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data. The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated. [2] [9] [3] [10] [11] The Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science. [12] [13] History Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) developed logic in a binary number system and has been called the "founder of computer science". [14] Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the "father of computing". [15] Ada Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer. [16] The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer . Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since antiquity, aiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since antiquity, even before the development of sophisticated computing equipment. [17] Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623. [18] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner . [19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system. In 1820, Thomas de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry [note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer , the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine , in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine . [20] He started developing this machine in 1834, and "in less than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer". [21] "A crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the Jacquard loom " [21] making it infinitely programmable. [note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers , which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer. [22] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator , which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM . Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 1909 published [23] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres Quevedo published his Essays on Automatics, [24] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic . [25] [26] In 1920, to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer , Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer , a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine, [27] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically. [28] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card equipment and was also in the calculator business [29] to develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I , based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used cards and a central computing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as "Babbage's dream come true". [30] During the 1940s, with the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the Atanasoff–Berry computer and ENIAC , the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors. [31] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New York City . The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world. [32] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946. [33] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 1950s and early 1960s. [7] [34] The world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science , began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962. [35] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights. See also: Informatics § Etymology Although first proposed in 1956, [36] the term "computer science" appears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM , [37] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921. [38] Louis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science , the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline. [37] His efforts, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe , were rewarded: universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962. [39] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed. [40] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy, [41] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science ; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases. In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested in the Communications of the ACM—turingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist . [42] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist. [43] The term computics has also been suggested. [44] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression "automatic information" (e.g. "informazione automatica" in Italian) or "information and mathematics" are often used, e.g. informatique (French), Informatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), informática (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika ( Slavic languages and Hungarian ) or pliroforiki (πληροφορική, which means informatics) in Greek . Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh ). [45] "In the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain." [46] A folkloric quotation, often attributed to—but almost certainly not first formulated by— Edsger Dijkstra , states that "computer science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes." [note 3] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering , while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems . However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science , linguistics , mathematics , physics , biology , Earth science , statistics , philosophy , and logic . Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science. [7] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt Gödel , Alan Turing , John von Neumann , Rózsa Péter and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic , category theory , domain theory , and algebra . [36] The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term "software engineering" means, and how computer science is defined. [47] David Parnas , taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines. [48] The academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science . Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research. Philosophy Main article: Philosophy of computer science Epistemology of computer science Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science, [49] mathematics, [50] or engineering. [51] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975, Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its unique forms of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a question to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available. [51] It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs , but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science. [51] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering . [51] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena. [51] Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods . [51] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems . [51] Paradigms of computer science A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics. [52] Peter Denning 's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design. [7] Amnon H. Eden described them as the "rationalist paradigm" (which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning ), the "technocratic paradigm" (which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the "scientific paradigm" (which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences , [53] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence ). [54] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems. [55] Fields This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources . Further information: Outline of computer science As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software. [56] [57] CSAB , formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation Board—which is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS) [58] —identifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, human–computer interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science. [56] Theoretical computer science Theoretical Computer Science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from the practical and everyday computation. Its aim is to understand the nature of computation and, as a consequence of this understanding, provide more efficient methodologies. Theory of computation Main article: Theory of computation According to Peter Denning , the fundamental question underlying computer science is, "What can be automated?" [3] Theory of computation is focused on answering fundamental questions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are required to perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first question, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation . The second question is addressed by computational complexity theory , which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems. The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems , [59] is an open problem in the theory of computation. M
Toggle the table of contents Artificial intelligence From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intelligence of machines "AI" redirects here. For other uses, see AI (disambiguation) , Artificial intelligence (disambiguation) , and Intelligent agent . Part of a series on e Artificial intelligence (AI), in its broadest sense, is intelligence exhibited by machines , particularly computer systems . It is a field of research in computer science that develops and studies methods and software which enable machines to perceive their environment and uses learning and intelligence to take actions that maximize their chances of achieving defined goals. [1] Such machines may be called AIs. AI technology is widely used throughout industry , government , and science. Some high-profile applications include advanced web search engines (e.g., Google Search ); recommendation systems (used by YouTube , Amazon , and Netflix ); interacting via human speech (e.g., Google Assistant , Siri , and Alexa ); autonomous vehicles (e.g., Waymo ); generative and creative tools (e.g., ChatGPT and AI art ); and superhuman play and analysis in strategy games (e.g., chess and Go ). [2] However, many AI applications are not perceived as AI: "A lot of cutting edge AI has filtered into general applications, often without being called AI because once something becomes useful enough and common enough it's not labeled AI anymore ." [3] [4] Alan Turing was the first person to conduct substantial research in the field that he called machine intelligence. [5] Artificial intelligence was founded as an academic discipline in 1956. [6] The field went through multiple cycles of optimism, [7] [8] followed by periods of disappointment and loss of funding, known as AI winter . [9] [10] Funding and interest vastly increased after 2012 when deep learning surpassed all previous AI techniques, [11] and after 2017 with the transformer architecture . [12] This led to the AI boom of the early 2020s, with companies, universities, and laboratories overwhelmingly based in the United States pioneering significant advances in artificial intelligence . [13] The growing use of artificial intelligence in the 21st century is influencing a societal and economic shift towards increased automation, data-driven decision-making , and the integration of AI systems into various economic sectors and areas of life, impacting job markets , healthcare , government, industry, and education . This raises questions about the long-term effects , ethical implications , and risks of AI , prompting discussions about regulatory policies to ensure the safety and benefits of the technology . The various sub-fields of AI research are centered around particular goals and the use of particular tools. The traditional goals of AI research include reasoning , knowledge representation , planning , learning , natural language processing , perception, and support for robotics . [a] General intelligence —the ability to complete any task performable by a human on an at least equal level—is among the field's long-term goals. [14] To reach these goals, AI researchers have adapted and integrated a wide range of techniques, including search and mathematical optimization , formal logic , artificial neural networks , and methods based on statistics , operations research , and economics . [b] AI also draws upon psychology , linguistics , philosophy , neuroscience , and other fields. [15] Goals The general problem of simulating (or creating) intelligence has been broken into sub-problems. These consist of particular traits or capabilities that researchers expect an intelligent system to display. The traits described below have received the most attention and cover the scope of AI research. [a] Reasoning and problem solving Early researchers developed algorithms that imitated step-by-step reasoning that humans use when they solve puzzles or make logical deductions . [16] By the late 1980s and 1990s, methods were developed for dealing with uncertain or incomplete information, employing concepts from probability and economics . [17] Many of these algorithms are insufficient for solving large reasoning problems because they experience a "combinatorial explosion": they became exponentially slower as the problems grew larger. [18] Even humans rarely use the step-by-step deduction that early AI research could model. They solve most of their problems using fast, intuitive judgments. [19] Accurate and efficient reasoning is an unsolved problem. Knowledge representation An ontology represents knowledge as a set of concepts within a domain and the relationships between those concepts. Knowledge representation and knowledge engineering [20] allow AI programs to answer questions intelligently and make deductions about real-world facts. Formal knowledge representations are used in content-based indexing and retrieval, [21] scene interpretation, [22] clinical decision support, [23] knowledge discovery (mining "interesting" and actionable inferences from large databases ), [24] and other areas. [25] A knowledge base is a body of knowledge represented in a form that can be used by a program. An ontology is the set of objects, relations, concepts, and properties used by a particular domain of knowledge. [26] Knowledge bases need to represent things such as: objects, properties, categories and relations between objects; [27] situations, events, states and time; [28] causes and effects; [29] knowledge about knowledge (what we know about what other people know); [30] default reasoning (things that humans assume are true until they are told differently and will remain true even when other facts are changing); [31] and many other aspects and domains of knowledge. Among the most difficult problems in knowledge representation are: the breadth of commonsense knowledge (the set of atomic facts that the average person knows is enormous); [32] and the sub-symbolic form of most commonsense knowledge (much of what people know is not represented as "facts" or "statements" that they could express verbally). [19] There is also the difficulty of knowledge acquisition , the problem of obtaining knowledge for AI applications. [c] Planning and decision making An "agent" is anything that perceives and takes actions in the world. A rational agent has goals or preferences and takes actions to make them happen. [d] [35] In automated planning , the agent has a specific goal. [36] In automated decision making , the agent has preferences—there are some situations it would prefer to be in, and some situations it is trying to avoid. The decision making agent assigns a number to each situation (called the " utility ") that measures how much the agent prefers it. For each possible action, it can calculate the " expected utility ": the utility of all possible outcomes of the action, weighted by the probability that the outcome will occur. It can then choose the action with the maximum expected utility. [37] In classical planning , the agent knows exactly what the effect of any action will be. [38] In most real-world problems, however, the agent may not be certain about the situation they are in (it is "unknown" or "unobservable") and it may not know for certain what will happen after each possible action (it is not "deterministic"). It must choose an action by making a probabilistic guess and then reassess the situation to see if the action worked. [39] In some problems, the agent's preferences may be uncertain, especially if there are other agents or humans involved. These can be learned (e.g., with inverse reinforcement learning ) or the agent can seek information to improve its preferences. [40] Information value theory can be used to weigh the value of exploratory or experimental actions. [41] The space of possible future actions and situations is typically intractably large, so the agents must take actions and evaluate situations while being uncertain what the outcome will be. A Markov decision process has a transition model that describes the probability that a particular action will change the state in a particular way, and a reward function that supplies the utility of each state and the cost of each action. A policy associates a decision with each possible state. The policy could be calculated (e.g., by iteration ), be heuristic , or it can be learned. [42] Game theory describes rational behavior of multiple interacting agents, and is used in AI programs that make decisions that involve other agents. [43] Learning Machine learning is the study of programs that can improve their performance on a given task automatically. [44] It has been a part of AI from the beginning. [e] There are several kinds of machine learning. Unsupervised learning analyzes a stream of data and finds patterns and makes predictions without any other guidance. [47] Supervised learning requires a human to label the input data first, and comes in two main varieties: classification (where the program must learn to predict what category the input belongs in) and regression (where the program must deduce a numeric function based on numeric input). [48] In reinforcement learning the agent is rewarded for good responses and punished for bad ones. The agent learns to choose responses that are classified as "good". [49] Transfer learning is when the knowledge gained from one problem is applied to a new problem. [50] Deep learning is a type of machine learning that runs inputs through biologically inspired artificial neural networks for all of these types of learning. [51] Computational learning theory can assess learners by computational complexity , by sample complexity (how much data is required), or by other notions of optimization . [52] Natural language processing Natural language processing (NLP) [53] allows programs to read, write and communicate in human languages such as English . Specific problems include speech recognition , speech synthesis , machine translation , information extraction , information retrieval and question answering . [54] Early work, based on Noam Chomsky 's generative grammar and semantic networks , had difficulty with word-sense disambiguation [f] unless restricted to small domains called " micro-worlds " (due to the common sense knowledge problem [32] ). Margaret Masterman believed that it was meaning, and not grammar that was the key to understanding languages, and that thesauri and not dictionaries should be the basis of computational language structure. Modern deep learning techniques for NLP include word embedding (representing words, typically as vectors encoding their meaning), [55] transformers (a deep learning architecture using an attention mechanism), [56] and others. [57] In 2019, generative pre-trained transformer (or "GPT") language models began to generate coherent text, [58] [59] and by 2023 these models were able to get human-level scores on the bar exam , SAT test, GRE test, and many other real-world applications. [60] Perception Machine perception is the ability to use input from sensors (such as cameras, microphones, wireless signals, active lidar , sonar, radar, and tactile sensors ) to deduce aspects of the world. Computer vision is the ability to analyze visual input. [61] The field includes speech recognition , [62] image classification , [63] facial recognition , object recognition , [64] and robotic perception . [65] Social intelligence Kismet , a robot head which was made in the 1990s; a machine that can recognize and simulate emotions. [66] Affective computing is an interdisciplinary umbrella that comprises systems that recognize, interpret, process or simulate human feeling, emotion and mood . [67] For example, some virtual assistants are programmed to speak conversationally or even to banter humorously; it makes them appear more sensitive to the emotional dynamics of human interaction, or to otherwise facilitate human–computer interaction . However, this tends to give naïve users an unrealistic conception of the intelligence of existing computer agents. [68] Moderate successes related to affective computing include textual sentiment analysis and, more recently, multimodal sentiment analysis , wherein AI classifies the affects displayed by a videotaped subject. [69] General intelligence A machine with artificial general intelligence should be able to solve a wide variety of problems with breadth and versatility similar to human intelligence. [14] Techniques AI research uses a wide variety of techniques to accomplish the goals above. [b] Search and optimization AI can solve many problems by intelligently searching through many possible solutions. [70] There are two very different kinds of search used in AI: state space search and local search . State space search State space search searches through a tree of possible states to try to find a goal state. [71] For example, planning algorithms search through trees of goals and subgoals, attempting to find a path to a target goal, a process called means-ends analysis . [72] Simple exhaustive searches [73] are rarely sufficient for most real-world problems: the search space (the number of places to search) quickly grows to astronomical numbers . The result is a search that is too slow or never completes. [18] " Heuristics " or "rules of thumb" can help to prioritize choices that are more likely to reach a goal. [74] Adversarial search is used for game-playing programs, such as chess or Go. It searches through a tree of possible moves and counter-moves, looking for a winning position. [75] Local search Illustration of gradient descent for 3 different starting points. Two parameters (represented by the plan coordinates) are adjusted in order to minimize the loss function (the height). Local search uses mathematical optimization to find a solution to a problem. It begins with some form of guess and refines it incrementally. [76] Gradient descent is a type of local search that optimizes a set of numerical parameters by incrementally adjusting them to minimize a loss function . Variants of gradient descent are commonly used to train neural networks. [77] Another type of local search is evolutionary computation , which aims to iteratively improve a set of candidate solutions by "mutating" and "recombining" them, selecting only the fittest to survive each generation. [78] Distributed search processes can coordinate via swarm intelligence algorithms. Two popular swarm algorithms used in search are particle swarm optimization (inspired by bird flocking ) and ant colony optimization (inspired by ant trails ). [79] Logic Formal logic is used for reasoning and knowledge representation . [80] Formal logic comes in two main forms: propositional logic (which operates on statements that are true or false and uses logical connectives such as "and", "or", "not" and "implies") [81] and predicate logic (which also operates on objects, predicates and relations and uses quantifiers such as "Every X is a Y" and "There are some Xs that are Ys"). [82] Deductive reasoning in logic is the process of proving a new statement ( conclusion ) from other statements that are given and assumed to be true (the premises ). [83] Proofs can be structured as proof trees , in which nodes are labelled by sentences, and children nodes are connected to  parent nodes by inference rules . Given a problem and a set of premises, problem-solving reduces to searching for a proof tree whose root node is labelled by a solution of the problem and whose leaf nodes are labelled by premises or axioms . In the case of Horn clauses , problem-solving search can be performed by reasoning forwards from the premises or backwards from the problem. [84] In the more general case of the clausal form of first-order logic , resolution is a single, axiom-free rule of inference, in which a problem is solved by proving a contradiction from premises that include the negation of the problem to be solved. [85] Inference in both Horn clause logic and first-order logic is undecidable , and therefore intractable . However, backward reasoning with Horn clauses, which underpins computation in the logic programming language Prolog , is Turing complete . Moreover, its efficiency is competitive with computation in other symbolic programming languages. [86] Fuzzy logic assigns a "degree of truth" between 0 and 1. It can therefore handle propositions that are vague and partially true. [87] Non-monotonic logics , including logic programming with negation as failure , are designed to handle default reasoning . [31] Other specialized versions of logic have been developed to describe many complex domains. Probabilistic methods for uncertain reasoning A simple Bayesian network , with the associated conditional probability tables Many problems in AI (including in reasoning, planning, learning, perception, and robotics) require the agent to operate with incomplete or uncertain information. AI researchers have devised a number of tools to solve these problems using methods from probability theory and economics. [88] Precise mathematical tools have been developed that analyze how an agent can make choices and plan, using decision theory , decision analysis , [89] and information value theory . [90] These tools include models such as Markov decision processes , [91] dynamic decision networks , [92] game theory and mechanism design . [93] Bayesian networks [94] are a tool that can be used for reasoning (using the Bayesian inference algorithm), [g] [96] learning (using the expectation-maximization algorithm ), [h] [98] planning (using decision networks ) [99] and perception (using dynamic Bayesian networks ). [92] Probabilistic algorithms can also be used for filtering, prediction, smoothing and finding explanations for streams of data, helping perception systems to analyze processes that occur over time (e.g., hidden Markov models or Kalman filters ). [92] Expectation-maximization clustering of Old Faithful eruption data starts from a random guess but then successfully converges on an accurate clustering of the two physically distinct modes of eruption. Classifiers and statistical learning methods The simplest AI applications can be divided into two types: classifiers (e.g., "if shiny then diamond"), on one hand, and controllers (e.g., "if diamond then pick up"), on the other hand. Classifiers [100] are functions that use pattern matching to determine the closest match. They can be fine-tuned based on chosen examples using supervised learning . Each pattern (also called an " observation ") is labeled with a certain predefined class. All the observations combined with their class labels are known as a data set . When a new observation is received, that observation is classified based on previous experience. [48] There are many kinds of classifiers in use. The decision tree is the simplest and most widely used symbolic machine learning algorithm. [101] K-nearest neighbor algorithm was the most widely used analogical AI until the mid-1990s, and Kernel methods such as the support vector machine (SVM) displaced k-nearest neighbor in the 1990s. [102] The naive Bayes classifier is reportedly the "most widely used learner" [103] at Google, due in part to its scalability. [104] Neural networks are also used as classifiers. [105] Artificial neural networks A neural network is an interconnected group of nodes, akin to the vast network of neurons in the human brain . An artificial neural network is based on a collection of nodes also known as artificial neurons , which loosely model the neurons in a biological brain. It is trained to recognise patterns; once trained, it can recognise those patterns in fresh data. There is an input, at least one hidden layer of nodes and an output. Each node applies a function and once the weight crosses its specified threshold, the data is transmitted to the next layer. A network is typically called a deep neural network if it has at least 2 hidden layers. [105] Learning algorithms for neural networks use local search to choose the weights that will get the right output for each input during training. The most common training technique is the backpropagation algorithm. [106] Neural networks learn to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs and find patterns in data. In theory, a neural network can learn any function. [107] In feedforward neural networks the signal passes in only one direction. [108] Recurrent neural networks feed the output signal back into the input, which allows short-term memories of previous input events. Long short term memory is the most successful network architecture for recurrent networks. [109] Perceptrons [110] use only a single layer of neurons, deep learning [111] uses multiple layers. Convolutional neural networks strengthen the connection between neurons that are "close" to each other—this is especially important in image processing , where a local set of neurons must identify an "edge" before the network can identify an object. [112] Deep learning Deep learning [111] uses several layers of neurons between the network's inputs and outputs. The multiple layers can progressively extract higher-level features from the raw input. For example, in image processing , lower layers may identify edges, while higher layers may identify the concepts relevant to a human such as digits or letters or faces. [113] Deep learning has profoundly improved the performance of programs in many important subfields of artificial intelligence, including computer vision , speech recognition , natural language processing , image classification [114] and others. The reason that deep learning performs so well in so many applications is not known as of 2023. [115] The sudden success of deep learning in 2012–2015 did not occur because of some new discovery or theoretical breakthrough (deep neural networks and backpropagation had been described by many people, as far back as the 1950s) [i] but because of two factors: the incredible increase in computer power (including the hundred-fold increase in speed by switching to GPUs ) and the availability of vast amounts of training data, especially the giant curated datasets used for benchmark testing, such as ImageNet . [j] GPT Generative pre-trained transformers (GPT) are large language models that are based on the semantic relationships between words in sentences ( natural language processing ). Text-based GPT models are pre-trained on a large corpus of text which can be from the internet. The pre-training consists in predicting the next token (a token being usually a word, subword, or punctuation). Throughout this pre-training, GPT models accumulate knowledge about the world, and can then generate human-like text by repeatedly predicting the next token. Typically, a subsequent training phase makes the model more truthful, useful and harmless, usually with a technique called reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). Current GPT models are still prone to generating falsehoods called " hallucinations ", although this can be reduced with RLHF and quality data. They are used in chatbots , which allow you to ask a question or request a task in simple text. [124] [125] Current models and services include: Gemini (formerly Bard), ChatGPT , Grok , Claude , Copilot and LLaMA . [126] Multimodal GPT models can process different types of data ( modalities ) such as images, videos, sound and text. [127] Specialized hardware and software Main articles: Programming languages for artificial intelligence and Hardware for artificial intelligence In the late 2010s, graphics processing units (GPUs) that were increasingly designed with AI-specific enhancements and used with specialized TensorFlow software, had replaced previously used central processing unit (CPUs) as the dominant means for large-scale (commercial and academic) machine learning models' training. [128] Historically, specialized languages, such as Lisp , Prolog , Python and others, had been used. Applications Main article: Artificial intelligence in healthcare The application of AI in medicine and medical research has the potential to increase patient care and quality of life. [129] Through the lens of the Hippocratic Oath , medical professionals are ethically compelled to use AI, if applications can more accurately diagnose and treat patients. For medical research, AI is an important tool for processing and integrating big data . This is particularly important for organoid and tissue engineering development which use microscopy imaging as a key technique in fabrication. [130] It has been suggested that AI can overcome discrepancies in funding allocated to different fields of research. [130] New AI tools can deepen our understanding of biomedically relevant pathways. For example, AlphaFold 2 (2021) demonstrated the ability to approximate, in hours rather than months, the 3D structure of a protein. [131] In 2023, it was reported that AI guided drug discovery helped find a class of antibiotics capable of killing two different types of drug-resistant bacteria. [132] Games Main article: Game artificial intelligence Game playing programs have been used since the 1950s to demonstrate and test AI's most advanced techniques. [133] Deep Blue became the first computer chess-playing system to beat a reigning world chess champion, Garry Kasparov , on 11 May 1997. [134] In 2011, in a Jeopardy! quiz show exhibition match, IBM 's question answering system , Watson , defeated the two greatest Jeopardy! champions, Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings , by a significant margin. [135] In March 2016, AlphaGo won 4 out of 5 games of Go in a match with Go champion Lee Sedol , becoming the first computer Go -playing system to beat a professional Go player without handicaps . Then in 2017 it defeated Ke Jie , who was the best Go player in the world. [136] Other programs handle imperfect-information games, such as the poker -playing program Pluribus . [137] DeepMind developed increasingly generalistic reinforcement learning models, such as with MuZero , which could be trained to play chess, Go, or Atari games. [138] In 2019, DeepMind's AlphaStar achieved grandmaster level in StarCraft II , a particularly challenging real-time strategy game that involves incomplete knowledge of what happens on the map. [139] In 2021 an AI agent competed in a PlayStation Gran Turismo competition, winning against four of the world's best Gran Turismo drivers using deep reinforcement learning. [140] Military Main article: Military artificial intelligence Various countries are deploying AI military applications. [141] The main applications enhance command and control , communications, sensors, integration and interoperability. [142] Research is targeting intelligence collection and analysis, logistics, cyber operations, information operations, and semiautonomous and autonomous vehicles . [141] AI technologies enable coordination of sensors and effectors, threat detection and identification, marking of enemy positions, target acquisition , coordination and deconfliction of distributed Joint Fires between networked combat vehicles involving manned and unmanned teams. [142] AI was incorporated into military operations in Iraq and Syria. [141] In November 2023, US Vice President Kamala Harris disclosed a declaration signed by 31 nations to set guardrails for the military use of AI. The commitments include using legal reviews to ensure the compliance of military AI with international laws, and being cautious and transparent in the development of this technology. [143] Generative AI Main article: Generative artificial intelligence Vincent van Gogh in watercolour created by generative AI software In the early 2020s, generative AI gained widespread prominence. In March 2023, 58% of US adults had heard about ChatGPT and 14% had tried it. [144] The increasing realism and ease-of-use of AI-based text-to-image generators such as Midjourney , DALL-E , and Stable Diffusion sparked a trend of viral AI-generated photos. Widespread attention was gained by a fake photo of Pope Francis wearing a white puffer coat, the fictional arrest of Donald Trump , and a hoax of an attack on the Pentagon , as well as the usage in professional creative arts. [145] [146] Industry-specific tasks There are also thousands of successful AI applications used to solve specific problems for specific industries or institutions. In a 2017 survey, one in five companies reported they had incorporated "AI" in some offerings or processes. [147] A few examples are energy storage , medical diagnosis, military logistics, applications that predict the result of judicial decisions, foreign policy , or supply chain management. In agriculture, AI has helped farmers identify areas that need irrigation, fertilization, pesticide treatments or increasing yield. Agronomists use AI to conduct research and development. AI has been used to predict the ripening time for crops such as tomatoes, monitor soil moisture, operate agricultural robots, conduct predictive analytics, classify livestock pig call emotions, automate greenhouses, detect diseases and pests, and save water. Artificial intelligence is used in astronomy to analyze increasing amounts of available data and applications, mainly for "classification, regression, clustering, forecasting, generation, discovery, and the development of new scientific insights" for example for discovering exoplanets, forecasting solar activity, and distinguishing between signals and instrumental effects in gravitational wave astronomy. It could also be used for activities in space such as space exploration, including analysis of data from space missions, real-time science decisions of spacecraft, space debris avoidance, and more autonomous operation. Capitalism and democracy This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it . (April 2024) Ethics Main article: Ethics of artificial intelligence AI has potential benefits and potential risks. AI may be able to advance science and find solutions for serious problems: Demis Hassabis of Deep Mind hopes to "solve intelligence, and then use that to solve everything else". [148] However, as the use of AI has become widespread, several unintended consequences and risks have been identified. [149] In-production systems can sometimes not factor ethics and bias into their AI training processes, especially when the AI algorithms are inherently unexplainable in deep learning. [150] Risks and harm Further information: Information privacy and Artificial intelligence and copyright Machine-learning algorithms require large amounts of data. The techniques used to acquire this data have raised concerns about privacy , surveillance and copyright . Technology companies collect a wide range of data from their users, including online activity, geolocation data, video and audio. [151] For example, in order to build speech recognition algorithms, Amazon has recorded millions of private conversations and allowed temporary workers to listen to and transcribe some of them. [152] Opinions about this widespread surveillance range from those who see it as a necessary evil to those for whom it is clearly unethical and a violation of the right to privacy . [153] AI developers argue that this is the only way to deliver valuable applications. and have developed several techniques that attempt to preserve privacy while still obtaining the data, such as data aggregation , de-identification and differential privacy . [154] Since 2016, some privacy experts, such as Cynthia Dwork , have begun to view privacy in terms of fairness . Brian Christian wrote that experts have pivoted "from the question of 'what they know' to the question of 'what they're doing with it'." [155] Generative AI is often trained on unlicensed copyrighted works, including in domains such as images or computer code; the output is then used under the rationale of " fair use ". Website owners who do not wish to have their copyrighted content AI-indexed or 'scraped' can add code to their site if they do not want their website to be indexed by a search engine, which is currently available through certain services such as OpenAI . Experts disagree about how well and under what circumstances this rationale will hold up in courts of law; relevant factors may include "the purpose and character of the use of the copyrighted work" and "the effect upon the potential market for the copyrighted work". [156] In 2023, leading authors (including John Grisham and Jonathan Franzen ) sued AI companies for using their work to train generative AI. [157] [158] Misinformation See also: YouTube § Moderation and offensive content YouTube , Facebook and others use recommender systems to guide users to more content. These AI programs were given the goal of maximizing user engagement (that is, the only goal was to keep people watching). The AI learned that users tended to choose misinformation , conspiracy theories , and extreme partisan content, and, to keep them watching, the AI recommended more of it. Users also tended to watch more content on the same subject, so the AI led people into filter bubbles where they received multiple versions of the same misinformation. [159] This convinced many users that the misinformation was true, and ultimately undermined trust in institutions, the media and the government. [160] The AI program had correctly learned to maximize its goal, but the result was harmful to society. After the U.S. election in 2016, major technology companies took steps to mitigate the problem. In 2022, generative AI began to create images, audio, video and text that are indistinguishable from real photographs, recordings, films or human writing. It is possible for bad actors to use this technology to create massive amounts of misinformation or propaganda. [161] AI pioneer Geoffrey Hinton expressed concern about AI enabling "authoritarian leaders to manipulate their electorates" on a large scale, among other risks. [162] Algorithmic bias and fairness Main articles: Algorithmic bias and Fairness (machine learning) Machine learning applications will be biased if they learn from biased data. [163] The developers may not be aware that the bias exists. [164] Bias can be introduced by the way training data is selected and by the way a model is deployed. [165] [163] If a biased algorithm is used to make decisions that can seriously harm people (as it can in medicine , finance , recruitment , housing or policing ) then the algorithm may cause discrimination . [166] Fairness in machine learning is the study of how to prevent the harm caused by algorithmic bias. It has become serious area of academic study within AI. Researchers have discovered it is not always possible to define "fairness" in a way that satisfies all stakeholders. [167] On June 28, 2015, Google Photos 's new image labeling feature mistakenly identified Jacky Alcine and a friend as "gorillas" because they were black. The system was trained on a dataset that contained very few images of black people, [168] a problem called "sample size disparity". [169] Google "fixed" this problem by preventing the system from labelling anything as a "gorilla". Eight years later, in 2023, Google Photos still could not identify a gorilla, and neither could similar products from Apple, Facebook, Microsoft and Amazon. [170] COMPAS is a commercial program widely used by U.S. courts to assess the likelihood of a defendant becoming a recidivist . In 2016, Julia Angwin at ProPublica discovered that COMPAS exhibited racial bias, despite the fact that the program was not told the races of the defendants. Although the error rate for both whites and blacks was calibrated equal at exactly 61%, the errors for each race were different—the system consistently overestimated the chance that a black person would re-offend and would underestimate the chance that a white person would not re-offend. [171] In 2017, several researchers [k] showed that it was mathematically impossible for COMPAS to accommodate all possible measures of fairness when the base rates of re-offense were different for whites and blacks in the data. [173] A program can make biased decisions even if the data does not explicitly mention a problematic feature (such as "race" or "gender"). The feature will correlate with other features (like "address", "shopping history" or "first name"), and the program will make the same decisions based on these features as it would on "race" or "gender". [174] Moritz Hardt said "the most robust fact in this research area is that fairness through blindness doesn't work." [175] Criticism of COMPAS highlighted that machine learning models are designed to make "predictions" that are only valid if we assume that the future will resemble the past. If they are trained on data that includes the results of racist decisions in the past, machine learning models must predict that racist decisions will be made in the future. If an application then uses these predictions as recommendations, some of these "recommendations" will likely be racist. [176] Thus, machine learning is not well suited to help make decisions in areas where there is hope that the future will be better than the past. It is necessarily descriptive and not proscriptive. [l] Bias and unfairness may go undetected because the developers are overwhelmingly white and male: among AI engineers, about 4% are black and 20% are women. [169] At its 2022 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (ACM FAccT 2022), the Association for Computing Machinery , in Seoul, South Korea, presented and published findings that recommend that until AI and robotics systems are demonstrated to be free of bias mistakes, they are unsafe, and the use of self-learning neural networks trained on vast, unregulated sources of flawed internet data should be curtailed. [178] Lack of transparency See also: Explainable AI , Algorithmic transparency , and Right to explanation Lidar testing vehicle for autonomous driving Many AI systems are so complex that their designers cannot explain how they reach their decisions. [179] Particularly with deep neural networks , in which there are a large amount of non- linear relationships between inputs and outputs. But some popular explainability techniques exist. [180] It is impossible to be certain that a program is operating correctly if no one knows how exactly it works. There have been many cases where a machine learning program passed rigorous tests, but nevertheless learned something different than what the programmers intended. For example, a system that could identify skin diseases better than medical professionals was found to actually have a strong tendency to classify images with a ruler as "cancerous", because pictures of malignancies typically include a ruler to show the scale. [181] Another machine learning system designed to help effectively allocate medical resources was found to classify patients with asthma as being at "low risk" of dying from pneumonia. Having asthma is actually a severe risk factor, but since the patients having asthma would usually get much more medical care, they were relatively unlikely to die according to the training data. The correlation between asthma and low risk of dying from pneumonia was real, but misleading. [182] People who have been harmed by an algorithm's decision have a right to an explanation. [183] Doctors, for example, are expected to clearly and completely explain to their colleagues the reasoning behind any decision they make. Early drafts of the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation in 2016 included an explicit statement that this right exists. [m] Industry experts noted that this is an unsolved problem with no solution in sight. Regulators argued that nevertheless the harm is real: if the problem has no solution, the tools should not be used. [184] DARPA established the XAI ("Explainable Artificial Intelligence") program in 2014 to try and solve these problems. [185] There are several possible solutions to the transparency problem. SHAP tried to solve the transparency problems by visualising the contribution of each feature to the output. [186] LIME can locally approximate a model with a simpler, interpretable model. [187] Multitask learning provides a large number of outputs in addition to the target classification. These other outputs can help developers deduce what the network has learned. [188] Deconvolution , DeepDream and other generative methods can allow developers to see what different layers of a deep network have learned and produce output that can suggest what the network is learning. [189] Bad actors and weaponized AI Artificial intelligence provides a number of tools that are useful to bad actors , such as authoritarian governments , terrorists , criminals or rogue states . A lethal autonomous weapon is a machine that locates, selects and engages human targets without human supervision. [n] Widely available AI tools can be used by bad actors to develop inexpensive autonomous weapons and, if produced at scale, they are potentially weapons of mass destruction . [191] Even when used in conventional warfare, it is unlikely that they will be unable to reliably choose targets and could potentially kill an innocent person . [191] In 2014, 30 nations (including China) supported a ban on autonomous weapons under the United Nations ' Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons , however the United States and others disagreed. [192] By 2015, over fifty countries were reported to be researching battlefield robots. [193] AI tools make it easier for authoritarian governments to efficiently control their citizens in several ways. Face and voice recognition allow widespread surveillance . Machine learning , operating this data, can classify potential enemies of the state and prevent them from hiding. Recommendation systems can precisely target propaganda and misinformation for maximum effect. Deepfakes and generative AI aid in producing misinformation. Advanced AI can make authoritarian centralized decision making more competitive with liberal and decentralized systems such as markets . It lowers the cost and difficulty of digital warfare and advanced spyware . [194] All these technologies have been available since 2020 or earlier -- AI facial recognition systems are already being used for mass surveillance in China. [195] [196] There many other ways that AI is expected to help bad actors, some of which can not be foreseen. For example, machine-learning AI is able to design tens of thousands of toxic molecules in a matter of hours. [197] Reliance on industry giants Training AI systems requires an enormous amount of computing power. Usually only Big Tech companies have the financial resources to make such investments. Smaller startups such as Cohere and OpenAI end up buying access to data centers from Google and Microsoft respectively. [198] Technological unemployment Main articles: Workplace impact of artificial intelligence and Technological unemployment Economists have frequently highlighted the risks of redundancies from AI, and speculated about unemployment if there is no adequate social policy for full employment. [199] In the past, technology has tended to increase rather than reduce total employment, but economists acknowledge that "we're in uncharted territory" with AI. [200] A survey of economists showed disagreement about whether the increasing use of robots and AI will cause a substantial increase in long-term unemployment , but they generally agree that it could be a net benefit if productivity gains are redistributed . [201] Risk estimates vary; for example, in the 2010s, Michael Osborne and Carl Benedikt Frey estimated 47% of U.S. jobs are at "high risk" of potential automation, while an OECD report classified only 9% of U.S. jobs as "high risk". [o] [203] The methodology of speculating about future employment levels has been criticised as lacking evidential foundation, and for implying that technology, rather than social policy, creates unemployment, as opposed to redundancies. [199] In April 2023, it was reported that 70% of the jobs for Chinese video game illustrators had been eliminated by generative artificial intelligence. [204] [205] Unlike previous waves of automation, many middle-class jobs may be eliminated by artificial intelligence; The Economist stated in 2015 that "the worry that AI could do to white-collar jobs what steam power did to blue-collar ones during the Industrial Revolution" is "worth taking seriously". [206] Jobs at extreme risk range from paralegals to fast food cooks, while job demand is likely to increase for care-related professions ranging from personal healthcare to the clergy. [207] From the early days of the development of artificial intelligence, there have been arguments, for example, those put forward by Joseph Weizenbaum , about whether tasks that can be done by computers actually should be done by them, given the difference between computers and humans, and between quantitative calculation and qualitative, value-based judgement. [208] Existential risk Main article: Existential risk from artificial general intelligence It has been argued AI will become so powerful that humanity may irreversibly lose control of it. This could, as physicist Stephen Hawking stated, " spell the end of the human race ". [209] This scenario has been common in science fiction, when a computer or robot suddenly develops a human-like "self-awareness" (or "sentience" or "consciousness") and becomes a malevolent character. [p] These sci-fi scenarios are misleading in several ways. First, AI does not require human-like " sentience " to be an existential risk. Modern AI programs are given specific goals and use learning and intelligence to achieve them. Philosopher Nick Bostrom argued that if one gives almost any goal to a sufficiently powerful AI, it may choose to destroy humanity to achieve it (he used the example of a paperclip factory manager ). [211] Stuart Russell gives the example of household robot that tries to find a way to kill its owner to prevent it from being unplugged, reasoning that "you can't fetch the coffee if you're dead." [212] In order to be safe for humanity, a superintelligence would have to be genuinely aligned with humanity's morality and values so that it is "fundamentally on our side". [213] Second, Yuval Noah Harari argues that AI does not require a robot body or physical control to pose an existential risk. The essential parts of civilization are not physical. Things like ideologies , law , government , money and the economy are made of language ; they exist because there are stories that billions of people believe. The current prevalence of misinformation suggests that an AI could use language to convince people to believe anything, even to take actions that are destructive. [214] The opinions amongst experts and industry insiders are mixed, with sizable fractions both concerned and unconcerned by risk from eventual superintelligent AI. [215] Personalities such as Stephen Hawking , Bill Gates , and Elon Musk have expressed concern about existential risk from AI. [216] AI pioneers including Fei-Fei Li , Geoffrey Hinton , Yoshua Bengio , Cynthia Breazeal , Rana el Kaliouby , Demis Hassabis , Joy Buolamwini , and Sam Altman have expressed concerns about the risks of AI. In 2023, many leading AI experts issued the joint statement that "Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war". [217] Other researchers, however, spoke in favor of a less dystopian view. AI pioneer Juergen Schmidhuber did not sign the joint statement, emphasising that in 95% of all cases, AI research is about making "human lives longer and healthier and easier." [218] While the tools that are now being used to improve lives can also be used by bad actors, "they can also be used against the bad actors." [219] [220] Andrew Ng also argued that "it's a mistake to fall for the doomsday hype on AI—and that regulators who do will only benefit vested interests." [221] Yann LeCun "scoffs at his peers' dystopian scenarios of supercharged misinformation and even, eventually, human extinction." [222] In the early 2010s, experts argued that the risks are too distant in the future to warrant research or that humans will be valuable from the perspective of a superintelligent machine. [223] However, after 2016, the study of current and future risks and possible solutions became a serious area of research. [224] Ethical machines and alignment Main articles: Machine ethics , AI safety , Friendly artificial intelligence , Artificial moral agents , and Human Compatible Friendly AI are machines that have been designed from the beginning to minimize risks and to make choices that benefit humans. Eliezer Yudkowsky , who coined the term, argues that developing friendly AI should be a higher research priority: it may require a large investment and it must be completed before AI becomes an existential risk. [225] Machines with intelligence have the potential to use their intelligence to make ethical decisions. The field of machine ethics provides machines with ethical principles and procedures for resolving ethical dilemmas. [226] The field of machine ethics is also called computational morality, [226] and was founded at an AAAI symposium in 2005. [227] Other approaches include Wendell Wallach 's "artificial moral agents" [228] and Stuart J. Russell 's three principles for developing provably beneficial machines. [229] Frameworks Artificial Intelligence projects can have their ethical permissibility tested while designing, developing, and implementing an AI system. An AI framework such as the Care and Act Framework containing the SUM values—developed by the Alan Turing Institute tests projects in four main areas: [230] [231] RESPECT the dignity of individual people CONNECT with other people sincerely, openly and inclusively CARE for the wellbeing of everyone PROTECT social values, justice and the public interest Other developments in ethical frameworks include those decided upon during the Asilomar Conference , the Montreal Declaration for Responsible AI, and the IEEE's Ethics of Autonomous Systems initiative, among others; [232] however, these principles do not go without their criticisms, especially regards to the people chosen contributes to these frameworks. [233] Promotion of the wellbeing of the people and communities that these technologies affect requires consideration of the social and ethical implications at all stages of AI system design, development and implementation, and collaboration between job roles such as data scientists, product managers, data engineers, domain experts, and delivery managers. [234] Regulation Main articles: Regulation of artificial intelligence , Regulation of algorithms , and AI safety The first global AI Safety Summit was held in 2023 with a declaration calling for international co-operation. The regulation of artificial intelligence is the development of public sector policies and laws for promoting and regulating artificial intelligence (AI); it is therefore related to the broader regulation of algorithms. [235] The regulatory and policy landscape for AI is an emerging issue in jurisdictions globally. [236] According to AI Index at Stanford , the annual number of AI-related laws passed in the 127 survey countries jumped from one passed in 2016 to 37 passed in 2022 alone. [237] [238] Between 2016 and 2020, more than 30 countries adopted dedicated strategies for AI. [239] Most EU member states had released national AI strategies, as had Canada, China, India, Japan, Mauritius, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, US and Vietnam. Others were in the process of elaborating their own AI strategy, including Bangladesh, Malaysia and Tunisia. [239] The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence was launched in June 2020, stating a need for AI to be developed in accordance with human rights and democratic values, to ensure public confidence and trust in the technology. [239] Henry Kissinger , Eric Schmidt , and Daniel Huttenlocher published a joint statement in November 2021 calling for a government commission to regulate AI. [240] In 2023, OpenAI leaders published recommendations for the governance of superintelligence, which they believe may happen in less than 10 years. [241] In 2023, the United Nations also launched an advisory body to provide recommendations on AI governance; the body comprises technology company executives, governments officials and academics. [242] In a 2022 Ipsos survey, attitudes towards AI varied greatly by country; 78% of Chinese citizens, but only 35% of Americans, agreed that "products and services using AI have more benefits than drawbacks". [237] A 2023 Reuters /Ipsos poll found that 61% of Americans agree, and 22% disagree, that AI poses risks to humanity. [243] In a 2023 Fox News poll, 35% of Americans thought it "very important", and an additional 41% thought it "somewhat important", for the federal government to regulate AI, versus 13% responding "not very important" and 8% responding "not at all important". [244] [245] In November 2023, the first global AI Safety Summit was held in Bletchley Park in the UK to discuss the near and far term risks of AI and the possibility of mandatory and voluntary regulatory frameworks. [246] 28 countries including the United States, China, and the European Union issued a declaration at the start of the summit, calling for international co-operation to manage the challenges and risks of artificial intelligence. [247] [248] History For a chronological guide, see Timeline of artificial intelligence . The study of mechanical or "formal" reasoning began with philosophers and mathematicians in antiquity. The study of logic led directly to Alan Turing 's theory of computation , which suggested that a machine, by shuffling symbols as simple as "0" and "1", could simulate any conceivable form of mathematical reasoning. [249] [5] This, along with concurrent discoveries in cybernetics , information theory and neurobiology , led researchers to consider the possibility of building an "electronic brain". [q] They developed several areas of research that would become part of AI, [251] such as McCullouch and Pitts design for "artificial neurons" in 1943, [252] and Turing's influential 1950 paper ' Computing Machinery and Intelligence ', which introduced the Turing test and showed that "machine intelligence" was plausible. [253] [5] The field of AI research was founded at a workshop at Dartmouth College in 1956. [r] [6] The attendees became the leaders of AI research in the 1960s. [s] They and their students produced programs that the press described as "astonishing": [t] computers were learning checkers strategies, solving word problems in algebra, proving logical theorems and speaking English. [u] [7] Artificial intelligence laboratories were set up at a number of British and U.S. Universities in the latter 1950s and early 1960s. [5] Researchers in the 1960s and the 1970s were convinced that their methods would eventually succeed in creating a machine with general intelligence and considered this the goal of their field. [257] Herbert Simon predicted, "machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do". [258] Marvin Minsky agreed, writing, "within a generation ... the problem of creating 'artificial intelligence' will substantially be solved". [259] They had, however, underestimated the difficulty of the problem. [v] In 1974, both the U.S. and British governments cut off exploratory research in response to the criticism of Sir James Lighthill [261] and ongoing pressure from the U.S. Congress to fund more productive projects . [262] Minsky 's and Papert 's book Perceptrons was understood as proving that artificial neural networks would never be useful for solving real-world tasks, thus discrediting the approach altogether. [263] The " AI winter ", a period when obtaining funding for AI projects was difficult, followed. [9] In the early 1980s, AI research was revived by the commercial success of expert systems , [264] a form of AI program that simulated the knowledge and analytical skills of human experts. By 1985, the market for AI had reached over a billion dollars. At the same time, Japan's fifth generation computer project inspired the U.S. and British governments to restore funding for academic research . [8] However, beginning with the collapse of the Lisp Machine market in 1987, AI once again fell into disrepute, and a second, longer-lasting winter began. [10] Up to this point, most of AI's funding had gone to projects which used high level symbols to represent mental objects like plans, goals, beliefs and known facts. In the 1980s, some researchers began to doubt that this approach would be able to imitate all the processes of human cognition, especially perception , robotics , learning and pattern recognition , [265] and began to look into "sub-symbolic" approaches. [266] Rodney Brooks rejected "representation" in general and focussed directly on engineering machines that move and survive. [w] Judea Pearl , Lofti Zadeh and others developed methods that handled incomplete and uncertain information by making reasonable guesses rather than precise logic. [88] [271] But the most important development was the revival of " connectionism ", including neural network research, by Geoffrey Hinton and others. [272] In 1990, Yann LeCun successfully showed that convolutional neural networks can recognize handwritten digits, the first of many successful applications of neural networks. [273] AI gradually restored its reputation in the late 1990s and early 21st century by exploiting formal mathematical methods and by finding specific solutions to specific problems. This " narrow " and "formal" focus allowed researchers to produce verifiable results and collaborate with other fields (such as statistics , economics and mathematics ). [274] By 2000, solutions developed by AI researchers were being widely used, although in the 1990s they were rarely described as "artificial intelligence". [275] However, several academic researchers became concerned that AI was no longer pursuing its original goal of creating versatile, fully intelligent machines. Beginning around 2002, they founded the subfield of artificial general intelligence (or "AGI"), which had several well-funded institutions by the 2010s. [14] Deep learning began to dominate industry benchmarks in 2012 and was adopted throughout the field. [11] For many specific tasks, other methods were abandoned. [x] Deep learning's success was based on both hardware improvements ( faster computers , [277] graphics processing units , cloud computing [278] ) and access to large amounts of data [279] (including curated datasets, [278] such as ImageNet ). Deep learning's success led to an enormous increase in interest and funding in AI. [y] The amount of machine learning research (measured by total publications) increased by 50% in the years 2015–2019. [239] In 2016, issues of fairness and the misuse of technology were catapulted into center stage at machine learning conferences, publications vastly increased, funding became available, and many researchers re-focussed their careers on these issues. The alignment problem became a serious field of academic study. [224] In the late teens and early 2020s, AGI companies began to deliver programs that created enormous interest. In 2015, AlphaGo , developed by DeepMind , beat the world champion Go player . The program was taught only the rules of the game and developed strategy by itself. GPT-3 is a large language model that was released in 2020 by OpenAI and is capable of generating high-quality human-like text. [280] These programs, and others, inspired an aggressive AI boom , where large companies began investing billions in AI research. According to 'AI Impacts', about $50 billion annually was invested in "AI" around 2022 in the U.S. alone and about 20% of new US Computer Science PhD graduates have specialized in "AI". [281] About 800,000 "AI"-related US job openings existed in 2022. [282] Philosophy
Rolling robots[ edit ] Segway in the Robot museum in Nagoya For simplicity, most mobile robots have four wheels or a number of continuous tracks . Some researchers have tried to create more complex wheeled robots with only one or two wheels. These can have certain advantages such as greater efficiency and reduced parts, as well as allowing a robot to navigate in confined places that a four-wheeled robot would not be able to. Two-wheeled balancing robots[ edit ] Balancing robots generally use a gyroscope to detect how much a robot is falling and then drive the wheels proportionally in the same direction, to counterbalance the fall at hundreds of times per second, based on the dynamics of an inverted pendulum . [53] Many different balancing robots have been designed. [54] While the Segway is not commonly thought of as a robot, it can be thought of as a component of a robot, when used as such Segway refer to them as RMP (Robotic Mobility Platform). An example of this use has been as NASA 's Robonaut that has been mounted on a Segway. [55] One-wheeled balancing robots[ edit ] Main article: Self-balancing unicycle A one-wheeled balancing robot is an extension of a two-wheeled balancing robot so that it can move in any 2D direction using a round ball as its only wheel. Several one-wheeled balancing robots have been designed recently, such as Carnegie Mellon University 's " Ballbot " which is the approximate height and width of a person, and Tohoku Gakuin University 's "BallIP". [56] Because of the long, thin shape and ability to maneuver in tight spaces, they have the potential to function better than other robots in environments with people. [57] Spherical orb robots[ edit ] Main article: Spherical robot Several attempts have been made in robots that are completely inside a spherical ball, either by spinning a weight inside the ball, [58] [59] or by rotating the outer shells of the sphere. [60] [61] These have also been referred to as an orb bot [62] or a ball bot. [63] [64] Six-wheeled robots[ edit ] Using six wheels instead of four wheels can give better traction or grip in outdoor terrain such as on rocky dirt or grass. TALON military robots used by the United States Army Tank tracks provide even more traction than a six-wheeled robot. Tracked wheels behave as if they were made of hundreds of wheels, therefore are very common for outdoor and military robots, where the robot must drive on very rough terrain. However, they are difficult to use indoors such as on carpets and smooth floors. Examples include NASA's Urban Robot "Urbie". [65] Further information: Mantis the spider robot Walking is a difficult and dynamic problem to solve. Several robots have been made which can walk reliably on two legs, however, none have yet been made which are as robust as a human. There has been much study on human-inspired walking, such as AMBER lab which was established in 2008 by the Mechanical Engineering Department at Texas A&M University. [66] Many other robots have been built that walk on more than two legs, due to these robots being significantly easier to construct. [67] [68] Walking robots can be used for uneven terrains, which would provide better mobility and energy efficiency than other locomotion methods. Typically, robots on two legs can walk well on flat floors and can occasionally walk up stairs . None can walk over rocky, uneven terrain. Some of the methods which have been tried are: Main article: Zero moment point The zero moment point (ZMP) is the algorithm used by robots such as Honda 's ASIMO . The robot's onboard computer tries to keep the total inertial forces (the combination of Earth 's gravity and the acceleration and deceleration of walking), exactly opposed by the floor reaction force (the force of the floor pushing back on the robot's foot). In this way, the two forces cancel out, leaving no moment (force causing the robot to rotate and fall over). [69] However, this is not exactly how a human walks, and the difference is obvious to human observers, some of whom have pointed out that ASIMO walks as if it needs the lavatory . [70] [71] [72] ASIMO's walking algorithm is not static, and some dynamic balancing is used (see below). However, it still requires a smooth surface to walk on. Hopping[ edit ] Several robots, built in the 1980s by Marc Raibert at the MIT Leg Laboratory, successfully demonstrated very dynamic walking. Initially, a robot with only one leg, and a very small foot could stay upright simply by hopping . The movement is the same as that of a person on a pogo stick . As the robot falls to one side, it would jump slightly in that direction, in order to catch itself. [73] Soon, the algorithm was generalised to two and four legs. A bipedal robot was demonstrated running and even performing somersaults . [74] A quadruped was also demonstrated which could trot , run, pace , and bound. [75] For a full list of these robots, see the MIT Leg Lab Robots page. [76] Dynamic balancing (controlled falling)[ edit ] A more advanced way for a robot to walk is by using a dynamic balancing algorithm, which is potentially more robust than the Zero Moment Point technique, as it constantly monitors the robot's motion, and places the feet in order to maintain stability. [77] This technique was recently demonstrated by Anybots' Dexter Robot, [78] which is so stable, it can even jump. [79] Another example is the TU Delft Flame . Main article: Passive dynamics Perhaps the most promising approach uses passive dynamics where the momentum of swinging limbs is used for greater efficiency . It has been shown that totally unpowered humanoid mechanisms can walk down a gentle slope, using only gravity to propel themselves. Using this technique, a robot need only supply a small amount of motor power to walk along a flat surface or a little more to walk up a hill . This technique promises to make walking robots at least ten times more efficient than ZMP walkers, like ASIMO. [80] [81] Other methods of locomotion[ edit ] Flying[ edit ] A modern passenger airliner is essentially a flying robot, with two humans to manage it. The autopilot can control the plane for each stage of the journey, including takeoff, normal flight, and even landing. [82] Other flying robots are uninhabited and are known as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). They can be smaller and lighter without a human pilot on board, and fly into dangerous territory for military surveillance missions. Some can even fire on targets under command. UAVs are also being developed which can fire on targets automatically, without the need for a command from a human. Other flying robots include cruise missiles , the Entomopter , and the Epson micro helicopter robot . Robots such as the Air Penguin, Air Ray, and Air Jelly have lighter-than-air bodies, are propelled by paddles, and are guided by sonar. Biomimetic flying robots (BFRs)[ edit ] A flapping wing BFR generating lift and thrust. BFRs take inspiration from flying mammals, birds, or insects. BFRs can have flapping wings, which generate the lift and thrust, or they can be propeller actuated. BFRs with flapping wings have increased stroke efficiencies, increased maneuverability, and reduced energy consumption in comparison to propeller actuated BFRs. [83] Mammal and bird inspired BFRs share similar flight characteristics and design considerations. For instance, both mammal and bird inspired BFRs minimize edge fluttering and pressure-induced wingtip curl by increasing the rigidity of the wing edge and wingtips. Mammal and insect inspired BFRs can be impact resistant, making them useful in cluttered environments. Mammal inspired BFRs typically take inspiration from bats, but the flying squirrel has also inspired a prototype. [84] Examples of bat inspired BFRs include Bat Bot [85] and the DALER. [86] Mammal inspired BFRs can be designed to be multi-modal; therefore, they're capable of both flight and terrestrial movement. To reduce the impact of landing, shock absorbers can be implemented along the wings. [86] Alternatively, the BFR can pitch up and increase the amount of drag it experiences. [84] By increasing the drag force, the BFR will decelerate and minimize the impact upon grounding. Different land gait patterns can also be implemented. [84] Dragonfly inspired BFR. Bird inspired BFRs can take inspiration from raptors, gulls, and everything in-between. Bird inspired BFRs can be feathered to increase the angle of attack range over which the prototype can operate before stalling. [87] The wings of bird inspired BFRs allow for in-plane deformation, and the in-plane wing deformation can be adjusted to maximize flight efficiency depending on the flight gait. [87] An example of a raptor inspired BFR is the prototype by Savastano et al. [88] The prototype has fully deformable flapping wings and is capable of carrying a payload of up to 0.8 kg while performing a parabolic climb, steep descent, and rapid recovery. The gull inspired prototype by Grant et al. accurately mimics the elbow and wrist rotation of gulls, and they find that lift generation is maximized when the elbow and wrist deformations are opposite but equal. [89] Insect inspired BFRs typically take inspiration from beetles or dragonflies. An example of a beetle inspired BFR is the prototype by Phan and Park, [90] and a dragonfly inspired BFR is the prototype by Hu et al. [91] The flapping frequency of insect inspired BFRs are much higher than those of other BFRs; this is because of the aerodynamics of insect flight . [92] Insect inspired BFRs are much smaller than those inspired by mammals or birds, so they are more suitable for dense environments. Biologically-inspired flying robots[ edit ] Visualization of entomopter flying on Mars (NASA) A class of robots that are biologically inspired, but which do not attempt to mimic biology, are creations such as the Entomopter . Funded by DARPA , NASA , the United States Air Force , and the Georgia Tech Research Institute and patented by Prof. Robert C. Michelson for covert terrestrial missions as well as flight in the lower Mars atmosphere, the Entomopter flight propulsion system uses low Reynolds number wings similar to those of the hawk moth (Manduca sexta), but flaps them in a non-traditional "opposed x-wing fashion" while "blowing" the surface to enhance lift based on the Coandă effect as well as to control vehicle attitude and direction. Waste gas from the propulsion system not only facilitates the blown wing aerodynamics, but also serves to create ultrasonic emissions like that of a Bat for obstacle avoidance. The Entomopter and other biologically-inspired robots leverage features of biological systems, but do not attempt to create mechanical analogs. Snaking[ edit ] Two robot snakes. The left one has 64 motors (with 2 degrees of freedom per segment), the right one 10. Several snake robots have been successfully developed. Mimicking the way real snakes move, these robots can navigate very confined spaces, meaning they may one day be used to search for people trapped in collapsed buildings. [93] The Japanese ACM-R5 snake robot [94] can even navigate both on land and in water. [95] Skating[ edit ] A small number of skating robots have been developed, one of which is a multi-mode walking and skating device. It has four legs, with unpowered wheels, which can either step or roll. [96] Another robot, Plen, can use a miniature skateboard or roller-skates, and skate across a desktop. [97] Capuchin, a climbing robot Climbing[ edit ] Several different approaches have been used to develop robots that have the ability to climb vertical surfaces. One approach mimics the movements of a human climber on a wall with protrusions; adjusting the center of mass and moving each limb in turn to gain leverage. An example of this is Capuchin, [98] built by Ruixiang Zhang at Stanford University, California. Another approach uses the specialized toe pad method of wall-climbing geckoes , which can run on smooth surfaces such as vertical glass. Examples of this approach include Wallbot [99] and Stickybot. [100] China's Technology Daily reported on 15 November 2008, that Li Hiu Yeung and his research group of New Concept Aircraft ( Zhuhai ) Co., Ltd. had successfully developed a bionic gecko robot named " Speedy Freelander ". According to Yeung, the gecko robot could rapidly climb up and down a variety of building walls, navigate through ground and wall fissures, and walk upside-down on the ceiling. It was also able to adapt to the surfaces of smooth glass, rough, sticky or dusty walls as well as various types of metallic materials. It could also identify and circumvent obstacles automatically. Its flexibility and speed were comparable to a natural gecko. A third approach is to mimic the motion of a snake climbing a pole. [40] Swimming (Piscine)[ edit ] It is calculated that when swimming some fish can achieve a propulsive efficiency greater than 90%. [101] Furthermore, they can accelerate and maneuver far better than any man-made boat or submarine , and produce less noise and water disturbance. Therefore, many researchers studying underwater robots would like to copy this type of locomotion. [102] Notable examples are the Essex University Computer Science Robotic Fish G9, [103] and the Robot Tuna built by the Institute of Field Robotics, to analyze and mathematically model thunniform motion . [104] The Aqua Penguin, [105] designed and built by Festo of Germany, copies the streamlined shape and propulsion by front "flippers" of penguins . Festo have also built the Aqua Ray and Aqua Jelly, which emulate the locomotion of manta ray, and jellyfish, respectively. Robotic Fish: iSplash-II In 2014, iSplash-II was developed by PhD student Richard James Clapham and Prof. Huosheng Hu at Essex University. It was the first robotic fish capable of outperforming real carangiform fish in terms of average maximum velocity (measured in body lengths/ second) and endurance, the duration that top speed is maintained. [106] This build attained swimming speeds of 11.6BL/s (i.e. 3.7 m/s). [107] The first build, iSplash-I (2014) was the first robotic platform to apply a full-body length carangiform swimming motion which was found to increase swimming speed by 27% over the traditional approach of a posterior confined waveform. [108] Sailing[ edit ] The autonomous sailboat robot Vaimos Sailboat robots have also been developed in order to make measurements at the surface of the ocean. A typical sailboat robot is Vaimos [109] built by IFREMER and ENSTA-Bretagne. Since the propulsion of sailboat robots uses the wind, the energy of the batteries is only used for the computer, for the communication and for the actuators (to tune the rudder and the sail). If the robot is equipped with solar panels, the robot could theoretically navigate forever. The two main competitions of sailboat robots are WRSC , which takes place every year in Europe, and Sailbot . Control[ edit ] Puppet Magnus , a robot-manipulated marionette with complex control systems Experimental planar robot arm and sensor-based, open-architecture robot controller developed at Sunderland University, UK in 2000 RuBot II can manually resolve Rubik's cubes. Further information: Control system The mechanical structure of a robot must be controlled to perform tasks. [110] The control of a robot involves three distinct phases – perception , processing, and action ( robotic paradigms ). [111] Sensors give information about the environment or the robot itself (e.g. the position of its joints or its end effector). This information is then processed to be stored or transmitted and to calculate the appropriate signals to the actuators ( motors ), which move the mechanical structure to achieve the required co-ordinated motion or force actions. The processing phase can range in complexity. At a reactive level, it may translate raw sensor information directly into actuator commands (e.g. firing motor power electronic gates based directly upon encoder feedback signals to achieve the required torque/velocity of the shaft). Sensor fusion and internal models may first be used to estimate parameters of interest (e.g. the position of the robot's gripper) from noisy sensor data. An immediate task (such as moving the gripper in a certain direction until an object is detected with a proximity sensor) is sometimes inferred from these estimates. Techniques from control theory are generally used to convert the higher-level tasks into individual commands that drive the actuators, most often using kinematic and dynamic models of the mechanical structure. [110] [111] [112] At longer time scales or with more sophisticated tasks, the robot may need to build and reason with a "cognitive" model. Cognitive models try to represent the robot, the world, and how the two interact. Pattern recognition and computer vision can be used to track objects. [110] Mapping techniques can be used to build maps of the world. Finally, motion planning and other artificial intelligence techniques may be used to figure out how to act. For example, a planner may figure out how to achieve a task without hitting obstacles, falling over, etc. Modern commercial robotic control systems are highly complex, integrate multiple sensors and effectors, have many interacting degrees-of-freedom (DOF) and require operator interfaces, programming tools and real-time capabilities. [111] They are oftentimes interconnected to wider communication networks and in many cases are now both IoT -enabled and mobile. [113] Progress towards open architecture, layered, user-friendly and 'intelligent' sensor-based interconnected robots has emerged from earlier concepts related to Flexible Manufacturing Systems (FMS), and several 'open or 'hybrid' reference architectures exist which assist developers of robot control software and hardware to move beyond traditional, earlier notions of 'closed' robot control systems have been proposed. [112] Open architecture controllers are said to be better able to meet the growing requirements of a wide range of robot users, including system developers, end users and research scientists, and are better positioned to deliver the advanced robotic concepts related to Industry 4.0 . [112] In addition to utilizing many established features of robot controllers, such as position, velocity and force control of end effectors, they also enable IoT interconnection and the implementation of more advanced sensor fusion and control techniques, including adaptive control, Fuzzy control and Artificial Neural Network (ANN)-based control. [112] When implemented in real-time, such techniques can potentially improve the stability and performance of robots operating in unknown or uncertain environments by enabling the control systems to learn and adapt to environmental changes. [114] There are several examples of reference architectures for robot controllers, and also examples of successful implementations of actual robot controllers developed from them. One example of a generic reference architecture and associated interconnected, open-architecture robot and controller implementation was developed by Michael Short and colleagues at the University of Sunderland in the UK in 2000 (pictured right). [112] The robot was used in a number of research and development studies, including prototype implementation of novel advanced and intelligent control and environment mapping methods in real-time. [114] [115] TOPIO , a humanoid robot , played ping pong at Tokyo IREX 2009. [116] Control systems may also have varying levels of autonomy. Direct interaction is used for haptic or teleoperated devices, and the human has nearly complete control over the robot's motion. Operator-assist modes have the operator commanding medium-to-high-level tasks, with the robot automatically figuring out how to achieve them. [117] An autonomous robot may go without human interaction for extended periods of time . Higher levels of autonomy do not necessarily require more complex cognitive capabilities. For example, robots in assembly plants are completely autonomous but operate in a fixed pattern. Another classification takes into account the interaction between human control and the machine motions. Teleoperation . A human controls each movement, each machine actuator change is specified by the operator. Supervisory. A human specifies general moves or position changes and the machine decides specific movements of its actuators. Task-level autonomy. The operator specifies only the task and the robot manages itself to complete it. Full autonomy. The machine will create and complete all its tasks without human interaction. Main article: Computer vision Computer vision is the science and technology of machines that see. As a scientific discipline, computer vision is concerned with the theory behind artificial systems that extract information from images. The image data can take many forms, such as video sequences and views from cameras. In most practical computer vision applications, the computers are pre-programmed to solve a particular task, but methods based on learning are now becoming increasingly common. Computer vision systems rely on image sensors that detect electromagnetic radiation which is typically in the form of either visible light or infra-red light . The sensors are designed using solid-state physics . The process by which light propagates and reflects off surfaces is explained using optics . Sophisticated image sensors even require quantum mechanics to provide a complete understanding of the image formation process. Robots can also be equipped with multiple vision sensors to be better able to compute the sense of depth in the environment. Like human eyes, robots' "eyes" must also be able to focus on a particular area of interest, and also adjust to variations in light intensities. There is a subfield within computer vision where artificial systems are designed to mimic the processing and behavior of biological system , at different levels of complexity. Also, some of the learning-based methods developed within computer vision have a background in biology. Environmental interaction and navigation[ edit ]
e The Internet standards describe a framework known as the Internet protocol suite (also called TCP/IP , based on the first two components.) This is a suite of protocols that are ordered into a set of four conceptional layers by the scope of their operation, originally documented in RFC 1122 and RFC 1123 . At the top is the application layer , where communication is described in terms of the objects or data structures most appropriate for each application. For example, a web browser operates in a client–server application model and exchanges information with the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and an application-germane data structure, such as the HyperText Markup Language (HTML). Below this top layer, the transport layer connects applications on different hosts with a logical channel through the network. It provides this service with a variety of possible characteristics, such as ordered, reliable delivery (TCP), and an unreliable datagram service (UDP). Underlying these layers are the networking technologies that interconnect networks at their borders and exchange traffic across them. The Internet layer implements the Internet Protocol (IP) which enables computers to identify and locate each other by IP address and route their traffic via intermediate (transit) networks. [75] The Internet Protocol layer code is independent of the type of network that it is physically running over. At the bottom of the architecture is the link layer , which connects nodes on the same physical link, and contains protocols that do not require routers for traversal to other links. The protocol suite does not explicitly specify hardware methods to transfer bits, or protocols to manage such hardware, but assumes that appropriate technology is available. Examples of that technology include Wi-Fi , Ethernet , and DSL . As user data is processed through the protocol stack, each abstraction layer adds encapsulation information at the sending host. Data is transmitted over the wire at the link level between hosts and routers. Encapsulation is removed by the receiving host. Intermediate relays update link encapsulation at each hop, and inspect the IP layer for routing purposes. Internet protocol Conceptual data flow in a simple network topology of two hosts (A and B) connected by a link between their respective routers. The application on each host executes read and write operations as if the processes were directly connected to each other by some kind of data pipe. After the establishment of this pipe, most details of the communication are hidden from each process, as the underlying principles of communication are implemented in the lower protocol layers. In analogy, at the transport layer the communication appears as host-to-host, without knowledge of the application data structures and the connecting routers, while at the internetworking layer, individual network boundaries are traversed at each router. The most prominent component of the Internet model is the Internet Protocol (IP). IP enables internetworking and, in essence, establishes the Internet itself. Two versions of the Internet Protocol exist, IPv4 and IPv6 . IP Addresses A DNS resolver consults three name servers to resolve the domain name user-visible "www.wikipedia.org" to determine the IPv4 Address 207.142.131.234. For locating individual computers on the network, the Internet provides IP addresses . IP addresses are used by the Internet infrastructure to direct internet packets to their destinations. They consist of fixed-length numbers, which are found within the packet. IP addresses are generally assigned to equipment either automatically via DHCP , or are configured. However, the network also supports other addressing systems. Users generally enter domain names (e.g. "en.wikipedia.org") instead of IP addresses because they are easier to remember; they are converted by the Domain Name System (DNS) into IP addresses which are more efficient for routing purposes. IPv4 Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) defines an IP address as a 32-bit number. [75] IPv4 is the initial version used on the first generation of the Internet and is still in dominant use. It was designed to address up to ≈4.3 billion (109) hosts. However, the explosive growth of the Internet has led to IPv4 address exhaustion , which entered its final stage in 2011, [76] when the global IPv4 address allocation pool was exhausted. IPv6 Because of the growth of the Internet and the depletion of available IPv4 addresses , a new version of IP IPv6 , was developed in the mid-1990s, which provides vastly larger addressing capabilities and more efficient routing of Internet traffic. IPv6 uses 128 bits for the IP address and was standardized in 1998. [77] [78] [79] IPv6 deployment has been ongoing since the mid-2000s and is currently in growing deployment around the world, since Internet address registries ( RIRs ) began to urge all resource managers to plan rapid adoption and conversion. [80] IPv6 is not directly interoperable by design with IPv4. In essence, it establishes a parallel version of the Internet not directly accessible with IPv4 software. Thus, translation facilities must exist for internetworking or nodes must have duplicate networking software for both networks. Essentially all modern computer operating systems support both versions of the Internet Protocol. Network infrastructure, however, has been lagging in this development. Aside from the complex array of physical connections that make up its infrastructure, the Internet is facilitated by bi- or multi-lateral commercial contracts, e.g., peering agreements , and by technical specifications or protocols that describe the exchange of data over the network. Indeed, the Internet is defined by its interconnections and routing policies. Subnetwork Creating a subnet by dividing the host identifier A subnetwork or subnet is a logical subdivision of an IP network . [81] : 1, 16 The practice of dividing a network into two or more networks is called subnetting. Computers that belong to a subnet are addressed with an identical most-significant bit -group in their IP addresses. This results in the logical division of an IP address into two fields, the network number or routing prefix and the rest field or host identifier. The rest field is an identifier for a specific host or network interface. The routing prefix may be expressed in Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) notation written as the first address of a network, followed by a slash character (/), and ending with the bit-length of the prefix. For example, 198.51.100.0/24 is the prefix of the Internet Protocol version 4 network starting at the given address, having 24 bits allocated for the network prefix, and the remaining 8 bits reserved for host addressing. Addresses in the range 198.51.100.0 to 198.51.100.255 belong to this network. The IPv6 address specification 2001:db8::/32 is a large address block with 296 addresses, having a 32-bit routing prefix. For IPv4, a network may also be characterized by its subnet mask or netmask, which is the bitmask that when applied by a bitwise AND operation to any IP address in the network, yields the routing prefix. Subnet masks are also expressed in dot-decimal notation like an address. For example, 255.255.255.0 is the subnet mask for the prefix 198.51.100.0/24. Traffic is exchanged between subnetworks through routers when the routing prefixes of the source address and the destination address differ. A router serves as a logical or physical boundary between the subnets. The benefits of subnetting an existing network vary with each deployment scenario. In the address allocation architecture of the Internet using CIDR and in large organizations, it is necessary to allocate address space efficiently. Subnetting may also enhance routing efficiency or have advantages in network management when subnetworks are administratively controlled by different entities in a larger organization. Subnets may be arranged logically in a hierarchical architecture, partitioning an organization's network address space into a tree-like routing structure. Routing Computers and routers use routing tables in their operating system to direct IP packets to reach a node on a different subnetwork. Routing tables are maintained by manual configuration or automatically by routing protocols . End-nodes typically use a default route that points toward an ISP providing transit, while ISP routers use the Border Gateway Protocol to establish the most efficient routing across the complex connections of the global Internet. The default gateway is the node that serves as the forwarding host (router) to other networks when no other route specification matches the destination IP address of a packet. [82] [83] IETF While the hardware components in the Internet infrastructure can often be used to support other software systems, it is the design and the standardization process of the software that characterizes the Internet and provides the foundation for its scalability and success. The responsibility for the architectural design of the Internet software systems has been assumed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). [84] The IETF conducts standard-setting work groups, open to any individual, about the various aspects of Internet architecture. The resulting contributions and standards are published as Request for Comments (RFC) documents on the IETF web site. The principal methods of networking that enable the Internet are contained in specially designated RFCs that constitute the Internet Standards . Other less rigorous documents are simply informative, experimental, or historical, or document the best current practices (BCP) when implementing Internet technologies. Applications and services Most servers that provide these services are today hosted in data centers , and content is often accessed through high-performance content delivery networks . World Wide Web This NeXT Computer was used by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN and became the world's first Web server . The World Wide Web is a global collection of documents , images , multimedia , applications, and other resources, logically interrelated by hyperlinks and referenced with Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs), which provide a global system of named references. URIs symbolically identify services, web servers , databases, and the documents and resources that they can provide. Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is the main access protocol of the World Wide Web. Web services also use HTTP for communication between software systems for information transfer, sharing and exchanging business data and logistics and is one of many languages or protocols that can be used for communication on the Internet. [85] World Wide Web browser software, such as Microsoft 's Internet Explorer / Edge , Mozilla Firefox , Opera , Apple 's Safari , and Google Chrome , enable users to navigate from one web page to another via the hyperlinks embedded in the documents. These documents may also contain any combination of computer data , including graphics, sounds, text , video , multimedia and interactive content that runs while the user is interacting with the page. Client-side software can include animations, games , office applications and scientific demonstrations. Through keyword -driven Internet research using search engines like Yahoo! , Bing and Google , users worldwide have easy, instant access to a vast and diverse amount of online information. Compared to printed media, books, encyclopedias and traditional libraries, the World Wide Web has enabled the decentralization of information on a large scale. The Web has enabled individuals and organizations to publish ideas and information to a potentially large audience online at greatly reduced expense and time delay. Publishing a web page, a blog, or building a website involves little initial cost and many cost-free services are available. However, publishing and maintaining large, professional web sites with attractive, diverse and up-to-date information is still a difficult and expensive proposition. Many individuals and some companies and groups use web logs or blogs, which are largely used as easily updatable online diaries. Some commercial organizations encourage staff to communicate advice in their areas of specialization in the hope that visitors will be impressed by the expert knowledge and free information and be attracted to the corporation as a result. Advertising on popular web pages can be lucrative, and e-commerce , which is the sale of products and services directly via the Web, continues to grow. Online advertising is a form of marketing and advertising which uses the Internet to deliver promotional marketing messages to consumers. It includes email marketing, search engine marketing (SEM), social media marketing, many types of display advertising (including web banner advertising), and mobile advertising . In 2011, Internet advertising revenues in the United States surpassed those of cable television and nearly exceeded those of broadcast television . [86] : 19 Many common online advertising practices are controversial and increasingly subject to regulation. When the Web developed in the 1990s, a typical web page was stored in completed form on a web server, formatted in HTML , ready for transmission to a web browser in response to a request. Over time, the process of creating and serving web pages has become dynamic, creating a flexible design, layout, and content. Websites are often created using content management software with, initially, very little content. Contributors to these systems, who may be paid staff, members of an organization or the public, fill underlying databases with content using editing pages designed for that purpose while casual visitors view and read this content in HTML form. There may or may not be editorial, approval and security systems built into the process of taking newly entered content and making it available to the target visitors. Communication Email is an important communications service available via the Internet. The concept of sending electronic text messages between parties, analogous to mailing letters or memos, predates the creation of the Internet. [87] [88] Pictures, documents, and other files are sent as email attachments . Email messages can be cc-ed to multiple email addresses . Internet telephony is a common communications service realized with the Internet. The name of the principal internetworking protocol, the Internet Protocol, lends its name to voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). The idea began in the early 1990s with walkie-talkie -like voice applications for personal computers. VoIP systems now dominate many markets and are as easy to use and as convenient as a traditional telephone. The benefit has been substantial cost savings over traditional telephone calls, especially over long distances. Cable , ADSL , and mobile data networks provide Internet access in customer premises [89] and inexpensive VoIP network adapters provide the connection for traditional analog telephone sets. The voice quality of VoIP often exceeds that of traditional calls. Remaining problems for VoIP include the situation that emergency services may not be universally available and that devices rely on a local power supply, while older traditional phones are powered from the local loop, and typically operate during a power failure. Data transfer File sharing is an example of transferring large amounts of data across the Internet. A computer file can be emailed to customers, colleagues and friends as an attachment. It can be uploaded to a website or File Transfer Protocol (FTP) server for easy download by others. It can be put into a "shared location" or onto a file server for instant use by colleagues. The load of bulk downloads to many users can be eased by the use of " mirror " servers or peer-to-peer networks. In any of these cases, access to the file may be controlled by user authentication , the transit of the file over the Internet may be obscured by encryption , and money may change hands for access to the file. The price can be paid by the remote charging of funds from, for example, a credit card whose details are also passed—usually fully encrypted—across the Internet. The origin and authenticity of the file received may be checked by digital signatures or by MD5 or other message digests. These simple features of the Internet, over a worldwide basis, are changing the production, sale, and distribution of anything that can be reduced to a computer file for transmission. This includes all manner of print publications, software products, news, music, film, video, photography, graphics and the other arts. This in turn has caused seismic shifts in each of the existing industries that previously controlled the production and distribution of these products. Streaming media is the real-time delivery of digital media for immediate consumption or enjoyment by end users. Many radio and television broadcasters provide Internet feeds of their live audio and video productions. They may also allow time-shift viewing or listening such as Preview, Classic Clips and Listen Again features. These providers have been joined by a range of pure Internet "broadcasters" who never had on-air licenses. This means that an Internet-connected device, such as a computer or something more specific, can be used to access online media in much the same way as was previously possible only with a television or radio receiver. The range of available types of content is much wider, from specialized technical webcasts to on-demand popular multimedia services. Podcasting is a variation on this theme, where—usually audio—material is downloaded and played back on a computer or shifted to a portable media player to be listened to on the move. These techniques using simple equipment allow anybody, with little censorship or licensing control, to broadcast audio-visual material worldwide. Digital media streaming increases the demand for network bandwidth. For example, standard image quality needs 1 Mbit/s link speed for SD 480p, HD 720p quality requires 2.5 Mbit/s, and the top-of-the-line HDX quality needs 4.5 Mbit/s for 1080p. [90] Webcams are a low-cost extension of this phenomenon. While some webcams can give full-frame-rate video, the picture either is usually small or updates slowly. Internet users can watch animals around an African waterhole, ships in the Panama Canal , traffic at a local roundabout or monitor their own premises, live and in real time. Video chat rooms and video conferencing are also popular with many uses being found for personal webcams, with and without two-way sound. YouTube was founded on 15 February 2005 and is now the leading website for free streaming video with more than two billion users. [91] It uses an HTML5 based web player by default to stream and show video files. [92] Registered users may upload an unlimited amount of video and build their own personal profile. YouTube claims that its users watch hundreds of millions, and upload hundreds of thousands of videos daily. Social impact The Internet has enabled new forms of social interaction, activities, and social associations. This phenomenon has given rise to the scholarly study of the sociology of the Internet . The early Internet left an impact on some writers who used symbolism to write about it, such as describing the Internet as a "means to connect individuals in a vast invisible net over all the earth ." [93] Users Share of population using the Internet. [94] Source data . Internet users per 100 population members and GDP per capita for selected countries Internet users per 100 inhabitants [95] [96] Between 2000 and 2009, the number of Internet users globally rose from 390 million to 1.9 billion. [97] By 2010, 22% of the world's population had access to computers with 1 billion Google searches every day, 300 million Internet users reading blogs, and 2 billion videos viewed daily on YouTube . [98] In 2014 the world's Internet users surpassed 3 billion or 44 percent of world population, but two-thirds came from the richest countries, with 78 percent of Europeans using the Internet, followed by 57 percent of the Americas. [99] However, by 2018, Asia alone accounted for 51% of all Internet users, with 2.2 billion out of the 4.3 billion Internet users in the world. China's Internet users surpassed a major milestone in 2018, when the country's Internet regulatory authority, China Internet Network Information Centre, announced that China had 802 million users. [100] China was followed by India, with some 700 million users, with the United States third with 275 million users. However, in terms of penetration, in 2022 China had a 70% penetration rate compared to India's 60% and the United States's 90%. [101] In 2022, 54% of the world's Internet users were based in Asia, 14% in Europe, 7% in North America, 10% in Latin America and the Caribbean , 11% in Africa, 4% in the Middle East and 1% in Oceania. [102] In 2019, Kuwait, Qatar, the Falkland Islands, Bermuda and Iceland had the highest Internet penetration by the number of users , with 93% or more of the population with access. [103] As of 2022, it was estimated that 5.4 billion people use the Internet, more than two-thirds of the world's population. [104] The prevalent language for communication via the Internet has always been English. This may be a result of the origin of the Internet, as well as the language's role as a lingua franca and as a world language . Early computer systems were limited to the characters in the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), a subset of the Latin alphabet . After English (27%), the most requested languages on the World Wide Web are Chinese (25%), Spanish (8%), Japanese (5%), Portuguese and German (4% each), Arabic, French and Russian (3% each), and Korean (2%). [105] The Internet's technologies have developed enough in recent years, especially in the use of Unicode , that good facilities are available for development and communication in the world's widely used languages. However, some glitches such as mojibake (incorrect display of some languages' characters) still remain. In a US study in 2005, the percentage of men using the Internet was very slightly ahead of the percentage of women, although this difference reversed in those under 30. Men logged on more often, spent more time online, and were more likely to be broadband users, whereas women tended to make more use of opportunities to communicate (such as email). Men were more likely to use the Internet to pay bills, participate in auctions, and for recreation such as downloading music and videos. Men and women were equally likely to use the Internet for shopping and banking. [106] In 2008, women significantly outnumbered men on most social networking services, such as Facebook and Myspace, although the ratios varied with age. [107] Women watched more streaming content, whereas men downloaded more. [108] Men were more likely to blog. Among those who blog, men were more likely to have a professional blog, whereas women were more likely to have a personal blog. [109] Several neologisms exist that refer to Internet users: Netizen (as in "citizen of the net") [110] refers to those actively involved in improving online communities , the Internet in general or surrounding political affairs and rights such as free speech , [111] [112] Internaut refers to operators or technically highly capable users of the Internet, [113] [114] digital citizen refers to a person using the Internet in order to engage in society, politics, and government participation. [115]
Toggle the table of contents Smartphone From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Handheld mobile device For other uses, see Smartphone (disambiguation) . A smartphone displaying the homepage of the English Wikipedia A smartphone (often simply called a phone) is a mobile device that combines the functionality of a traditional mobile phone with advanced computing capabilities. It typically has a touchscreen interface, allowing users to access a wide range of applications and services, such as web browsing , email , and social media , as well as multimedia playback and streaming . Smartphones have built-in cameras , GPS navigation , and support for various communication methods, including voice calls, text messaging , and internet-based messaging apps. Smartphones are distinguished from older-design feature phones by their more advanced hardware capabilities and extensive mobile operating systems , access to the internet , business applications, mobile payments , and multimedia functionality, including music, video, gaming , radio , and television . Smartphones typically contain a number of metal–oxide–semiconductor (MOS) integrated circuit (IC) chips, include various sensors that can be leveraged by pre-installed and third-party software (such as a magnetometer , a proximity sensor , a barometer , a gyroscope , an accelerometer , and more ), and support diverse wireless communication protocols (such as LTE , 5G NR , Wi-Fi , Bluetooth , and satellite navigation ). In the mid-2020s, smartphone manufacturers have begun to integrate satellite messaging connectivity and satellite emergency services into devices for use in remote regions where there is no reliable cellular network . Following the rising popularity of the iPhone in the late 2000s, the majority of smartphones have featured thin, slate-like form factors with large, capacitive touch screens with support for multi-touch gestures rather than physical keyboards. Most modern smartphones have the ability for users to download or purchase additional applications from a centralized app store . They often have support for cloud storage and cloud synchronization, and virtual assistants . Smartphones have largely replaced personal digital assistant (PDA) devices, handheld/palm-sized PCs , portable media players (PMP), [1] point-and-shoot cameras , camcorders , and, to a lesser extent, handheld video game consoles , e-reader devices, pocket calculators , and GPS tracking units . Since the early 2010s, improved hardware and faster wireless communication (due to standards such as LTE and 5G NR) have bolstered the growth of the smartphone industry. As of 2014, over a billion smartphones are sold globally every year. In 2019 alone, 1.54 billion smartphone units were shipped worldwide. [2] 75.05 percent of the world population were smartphone users as of 2020. [3] History See also: Mobile operating system § Timeline Early smartphones were marketed primarily towards the enterprise market, attempting to bridge the functionality of standalone PDA devices with support for cellular telephony , but were limited by their bulky form, short battery life , slow analog cellular networks, and the immaturity of wireless data services. These issues were eventually resolved with the exponential scaling and miniaturization of MOS transistors down to sub-micron levels ( Moore's law ), the improved lithium-ion battery , faster digital mobile data networks ( Edholm's law ), and more mature software platforms that allowed mobile device ecosystems to develop independently of data providers . In the 2000s, NTT DoCoMo 's i-mode platform, BlackBerry , Nokia 's Symbian platform, and Windows Mobile began to gain market traction, with models often featuring QWERTY keyboards or resistive touchscreen input and emphasizing access to push email and wireless internet . Forerunner IBM Simon and charging base (1994) [4] In the early 1990s, IBM engineer Frank Canova realised that chip-and-wireless technology was becoming small enough to use in handheld devices . [5] The first commercially available device that could be properly referred to as a "smartphone" began as a prototype called "Angler" developed by Canova in 1992 while at IBM and demonstrated in November of that year at the COMDEX computer industry trade show. [6] [7] [8] A refined version was marketed to consumers in 1994 by BellSouth under the name Simon Personal Communicator . In addition to placing and receiving cellular calls , the touchscreen-equipped Simon could send and receive faxes and emails . It included an address book, calendar, appointment scheduler, calculator, world time clock, and notepad, as well as other visionary mobile applications such as maps, stock reports and news. [9] The IBM Simon was manufactured by Mitsubishi Electric , which integrated features with its own cellular radio technologies. [10] It featured a liquid-crystal display (LCD) and PC Card support. [11] The Simon was commercially unsuccessful, particularly due to its bulky form factor and limited battery life , [12] using NiCad batteries rather than the nickel–metal hydride batteries commonly used in mobile phones in the 1990s, or lithium-ion batteries used in modern smartphones. [13] The term "smart phone" was not coined until a year after the introduction of the Simon, appearing in print as early as 1995, describing AT&T's PhoneWriter Communicator. [14] [ non-primary source needed ] The term "smartphone" was first used by Ericsson in 1997 to describe a new device concept, the GS88. [15] PDA/phone hybrids Main article: Personal digital assistant Beginning in the mid-to-late 1990s, many people who had mobile phones carried a separate dedicated PDA device, running early versions of operating systems such as Palm OS , Newton OS , Symbian or Windows CE / Pocket PC . These operating systems would later evolve into early mobile operating systems . Most of the "smartphones" in this era were hybrid devices that combined these existing familiar PDA OSes with basic phone hardware. The results were devices that were bulkier than either dedicated mobile phones or PDAs, but allowed a limited amount of cellular Internet access. PDA and mobile phone manufacturers competed in reducing the size of devices. The bulk of these smartphones combined with their high cost and expensive data plans, plus other drawbacks such as expansion limitations and decreased battery life compared to separate standalone devices, generally limited their popularity to " early adopters " and business users who needed portable connectivity. In March 1996, Hewlett-Packard released the OmniGo 700LX , a modified HP 200LX palmtop PC with a Nokia 2110 mobile phone piggybacked onto it and ROM -based software to support it. It had a 640 × 200 resolution CGA compatible four-shade gray-scale LCD screen and could be used to place and receive calls, and to create and receive text messages, emails and faxes. It was also 100% DOS 5.0 compatible, allowing it to run thousands of existing software titles, including early versions of Windows . The Nokia 9110 Communicator, opened for access to keyboard In August 1996, Nokia released the Nokia 9000 Communicator , a digital cellular PDA based on the Nokia 2110 with an integrated system based on the PEN/GEOS 3.0 operating system from Geoworks . The two components were attached by a hinge in what became known as a clamshell design , with the display above and a physical QWERTY keyboard below. The PDA provided e-mail; calendar, address book, calculator and notebook applications; text-based Web browsing; and could send and receive faxes. When closed, the device could be used as a digital cellular telephone. In June 1999 Qualcomm released the "pdQ Smartphone", a CDMA digital PCS smartphone with an integrated Palm PDA and Internet connectivity. [16] Subsequent landmark devices included: The Ericsson R380 (December 2000) [17] by Ericsson Mobile Communications , [18] the first phone running the operating system later named Symbian (it ran EPOC Release 5, which was renamed Symbian OS at Release 6). It had PDA functionality and limited Web browsing on a resistive touchscreen utilizing a stylus . [19] While it was marketed as a "smartphone", [20] users could not install their own software on the device. The Kyocera 6035 (February 2001), [21] a dual-nature device with a separate Palm OS PDA operating system and CDMA mobile phone firmware. It supported limited Web browsing with the PDA software treating the phone hardware as an attached modem. [22] [23] The Nokia 9210 Communicator (June 2001), [24] the first phone running Symbian (Release 6) with Nokia 's Series 80 platform (v1.0). This was the first Symbian phone platform allowing the installation of additional applications. Like the Nokia 9000 Communicator, it is a large clamshell device with a full physical QWERTY keyboard inside. Handspring 's Treo 180 (2002), the first smartphone that fully integrated the Palm OS on a GSM mobile phone having telephony, SMS messaging and Internet access built into the OS. The 180 model had a thumb-type keyboard and the 180g version had a Graffiti handwriting recognition area, instead. [25] Japanese cell phones Main articles: Japanese mobile phone culture and Mobile phone industry in Japan In 1999, Japanese wireless provider NTT DoCoMo launched i-mode , a new mobile internet platform which provided data transmission speeds up to 9.6 kilobits per second, and access web services available through the platform such as online shopping. NTT DoCoMo's i-mode used cHTML , a language which restricted some aspects of traditional HTML in favor of increasing data speed for the devices. Limited functionality, small screens and limited bandwidth allowed for phones to use the slower data speeds available. The rise of i-mode helped NTT DoCoMo accumulate an estimated 40 million subscribers by the end of 2001, and ranked first in market capitalization in Japan and second globally. [26] Japanese cell phones increasingly diverged from global standards and trends to offer other forms of advanced services and smartphone-like functionality that were specifically tailored to the Japanese market , such as mobile payments and shopping, near-field communication (NFC) allowing mobile wallet functionality to replace smart cards for transit fares, loyalty cards, identity cards, event tickets, coupons, money transfer, etc., downloadable content like musical ringtones , games , and comics , and 1seg mobile television . [27] [28] Phones built by Japanese manufacturers used custom firmware , however, and did not yet feature standardized mobile operating systems designed to cater to third-party application development , so their software and ecosystems were akin to very advanced feature phones . As with other feature phones, additional software and services required partnerships and deals with providers. The degree of integration between phones and carriers, unique phone features, non-standardized platforms, and tailoring to Japanese culture made it difficult for Japanese manufacturers to export their phones, especially when demand was so high in Japan that the companies did not feel the need to look elsewhere for additional profits. [29] [30] [31] The rise of 3G technology in other markets and non-Japanese phones with powerful standardized smartphone operating systems , app stores , and advanced wireless network capabilities allowed non-Japanese phone manufacturers to finally break in to the Japanese market, gradually adopting Japanese phone features like emojis , mobile payments, NFC, etc. and spreading them to the rest of the world. Early smartphones Several BlackBerry smartphones, which were highly popular in the mid-late 2000s Phones that made effective use of any significant data connectivity were still rare outside Japan until the introduction of the Danger Hiptop in 2002, which saw moderate success among U.S. consumers as the T-Mobile Sidekick. Later, in the mid-2000s, business users in the U.S. started to adopt devices based on Microsoft's Windows Mobile , and then BlackBerry smartphones from Research In Motion . American users popularized the term "CrackBerry" in 2006 due to the BlackBerry's addictive nature. [32] In the U.S., the high cost of data plans and relative rarity of devices with Wi-Fi capabilities that could avoid cellular data network usage kept adoption of smartphones mainly to business professionals and " early adopters ." Outside the U.S. and Japan, Nokia was seeing success with its smartphones based on Symbian , originally developed by Psion for their personal organisers, and it was the most popular smartphone OS in Europe during the middle to late 2000s. Initially, Nokia's Symbian smartphones were focused on business with the Eseries , [33] similar to Windows Mobile and BlackBerry devices at the time. From 2002 onwards, Nokia started producing consumer-focused smartphones, popularized by the entertainment-focused Nseries . Until 2010, Symbian was the world's most widely used smartphone operating system. [34] The touchscreen personal digital assistant (PDA)–derived nature of adapted operating systems like Palm OS , the " Pocket PC " versions of what was later Windows Mobile , and the UIQ interface that was originally designed for pen-based PDAs on Symbian OS devices resulted in some early smartphones having stylus-based interfaces. These allowed for virtual keyboards and handwriting input, thus also allowing easy entry of Asian characters. [35] By the mid-2000s, the majority of smartphones had a physical QWERTY keyboard. Most used a " keyboard bar " form factor, like the BlackBerry line, Windows Mobile smartphones, Palm Treos , and some of the Nokia Eseries . A few hid their full physical QWERTY keyboard in a sliding form factor , like the Danger Hiptop line. Some even had only a numeric keypad using T9 text input , like the Nokia Nseries and other models in the Nokia Eseries . Resistive touchscreens with stylus -based interfaces could still be found on a few smartphones, like the Palm Treos , which had dropped their handwriting input after a few early models that were available in versions with Graffiti instead of a keyboard. Form factor and operating system shifts The LG Prada with a large capacitive touchscreen introduced in 2006 The original Apple iPhone ; following its introduction the common smartphone form factor shifted to large touchscreen software interfaces without physical keypads [36] The late 2000s and early 2010s saw a shift in smartphone interfaces away from devices with physical keyboards and keypads to ones with large finger-operated capacitive touchscreens. [36] The first phone of any kind with a large capacitive touchscreen was the LG Prada , announced by LG in December 2006. [37] This was a fashionable feature phone created in collaboration with Italian luxury designer Prada with a 3" 240 x 400 pixel screen, a 2-Megapixel digital camera with 144p video recording ability, an LED flash, and a miniature mirror for self portraits. [38] [39] In January 2007, Apple Computer introduced the iPhone . [40] [41] [42] It had a 3.5" capacitive touchscreen with twice the common resolution of most smartphone screens at the time , [43] and introduced multi-touch to phones, which allowed gestures such as "pinching" to zoom in or out on photos, maps, and web pages. The iPhone was notable as being the first device of its kind targeted at the mass market to abandon the use of a stylus, keyboard, or keypad typical of contemporary smartphones, instead using a large touchscreen for direct finger input as its main means of interaction. [35] The iPhone's operating system was also a shift away from older operating systems (which older phones supported and which were adapted from PDAs and feature phones ) to an operative system powerful enough to not require using a limited, stripped down web browser that can only render pages specially formatted using technologies such as WML , cHTML , or XHTML and instead ran a version of Apple's Safari browser that could easily render full websites [44] [45] [46] not specifically designed for phones. [47] Later Apple shipped a software update that gave the iPhone a built-in on-device App Store allowing direct wireless downloads of third-party software. [48] [49] This kind of centralized App Store and free developer tools [50] [51] quickly became the new main paradigm for all smartphone platforms for software development , distribution , discovery, installation , and payment, in place of expensive developer tools that required official approval to use and a dependence on third-party sources providing applications for multiple platforms. [36] The advantages of a design with software powerful enough to support advanced applications and a large capacitive touchscreen affected the development of another smartphone OS platform, Android , with a more BlackBerry-like prototype device scrapped in favor of a touchscreen device with a slide-out physical keyboard, as Google's engineers thought at the time that a touchscreen could not completely replace a physical keyboard and buttons. [52] [53] [54] Android is based around a modified Linux kernel, again providing more power than mobile operating systems adapted from PDAs and feature phones. The first Android device, the horizontal-sliding HTC Dream , was released in September 2008. [55] In 2012, Asus started experimenting with a convertible docking system named PadFone , where the standalone handset can when necessary be inserted into a tablet -sized screen unit with integrated supportive battery and used as such. In 2013 and 2014, Samsung experimented with the hybrid combination of compact camera and smartphone, releasing the Galaxy S4 Zoom and K Zoom , each equipped with integrated 10× optical zoom lens and manual parameter settings (including manual exposure and focus) years before these were widely adapted among smartphones. The S4 Zoom additionally has a rotary knob ring around the lens and a tripod mount. While screen sizes have increased, manufacturers have attempted to make smartphones thinner at the expense of utility and sturdiness, since a thinner frame is more vulnerable to bending and has less space for components, namely battery capacity. [56] [57] Operating system competition A Meizu MX4 with Flyme OS The iPhone and later touchscreen-only Android devices together popularized the slate form factor , based on a large capacitive touchscreen as the sole means of interaction, and led to the decline of earlier, keyboard- and keypad-focused platforms. [36] Later, navigation keys such as the home , back, menu , task and search buttons have also been increasingly replaced by nonphysical touch keys, then virtual, simulated on-screen navigation keys, commonly with access combinations such as a long press of the task key to simulate a short menu key press, as with home button to search. [58] More recent "bezel-less" types have their screen surface space extended to the unit's front bottom to compensate for the display area lost for simulating the navigation keys. While virtual keys offer more potential customizability, their location may be inconsistent among systems depending on screen rotation and software used. Multiple vendors attempted to update or replace their existing smartphone platforms and devices to better-compete with Android and the iPhone; Palm unveiled a new platform known as webOS for its Palm Pre in late-2009 to replace Palm OS , which featured a focus on a task-based "card" metaphor and seamless synchronization and integration between various online services (as opposed to the then-conventional concept of a smartphone needing a PC to serve as a "canonical, authoritative repository" for user data). [59] [60] HP acquired Palm in 2010 and released several other webOS devices, including the Pre 3 and HP TouchPad tablet. As part of a proposed divestment of its consumer business to focus on enterprise software, HP abruptly ended development of future webOS devices in August 2011, and sold the rights to webOS to LG Electronics in 2013, for use as a smart TV platform. [61] [62] Research in Motion introduced the vertical-sliding BlackBerry Torch and BlackBerry OS 6 in 2010, which featured a redesigned user interface, support for gestures such as pinch-to-zoom, and a new web browser based on the same WebKit rendering engine used by the iPhone. [63] [64] The following year, RIM released BlackBerry OS 7 and new models in the Bold and Torch ranges, which included a new Bold with a touchscreen alongside its keyboard, and the Torch 9860—the first BlackBerry phone to not include a physical keyboard. [65] In 2013, it replaced the legacy BlackBerry OS with a revamped, QNX -based platform known as BlackBerry 10 , with the all-touch BlackBerry Z10 and keyboard-equipped Q10 as launch devices. [66] In 2010, Microsoft unveiled a replacement for Windows Mobile known as Windows Phone , featuring a new touchscreen-centric user interface built around flat design and typography, a home screen with "live tiles" containing feeds of updates from apps, as well as integrated Microsoft Office apps. [67] In February 2011, Nokia announced that it had entered into a major partnership with Microsoft, under which it would exclusively use Windows Phone on all of its future smartphones, and integrate Microsoft's Bing search engine and Bing Maps (which, as part of the partnership, would also license Nokia Maps data) into all future devices. The announcement led to the abandonment of both Symbian, as well as MeeGo —a Linux-based mobile platform it was co-developing with Intel. [68] [69] [70] Nokia's low-end Lumia 520 saw strong demand and helped Windows Phone gain niche popularity in some markets, [71] overtaking BlackBerry in global market share in 2013. [72] [73] In mid-June 2012, Meizu released its mobile operating system, Flyme OS . Many of these attempts to compete with Android and iPhone were short-lived. Over the course of the decade, the two platforms became a clear duopoly in smartphone sales and market share, with BlackBerry, Windows Phone, and other operating systems eventually stagnating to little or no measurable market share. [74] [75] In 2015, BlackBerry began to pivot away from its in-house mobile platforms in favor of producing Android devices, focusing on a security-enhanced distribution of the software. The following year, the company announced that it would also exit the hardware market to focus more on software and its enterprise middleware, [76] and began to license the BlackBerry brand and its Android distribution to third-party OEMs such as TCL for future devices. [77] [78] In September 2013, Microsoft announced its intent to acquire Nokia's mobile device business for $7.1 billion, as part of a strategy under CEO Steve Ballmer for Microsoft to be a "devices and services" company. [79] Despite the growth of Windows Phone and the Lumia range (which accounted for nearly 90% of all Windows Phone devices sold), [80] the platform never had significant market share in the key U.S. market, [71] and Microsoft was unable to maintain Windows Phone's momentum in the years that followed, resulting in dwindling interest from users and app developers. [81] After Balmer was succeeded by Satya Nadella (who has placed a larger focus on software and cloud computing) as CEO of Microsoft, it took a $7.6 billion write-off on the Nokia assets in July 2015, and laid off nearly the entire Microsoft Mobile unit in May 2016. [82] [83] [79] Prior to the completion of the sale to Microsoft, Nokia released a series of Android-derived smartphones for emerging markets known as Nokia X , which combined an Android-based platform with elements of Windows Phone and Nokia's feature phone platform Asha , using Microsoft and Nokia services rather than Google. [84] Camera advancements The back of a Nokia 9 PureView . It features a five-lens camera array with Zeiss optics, using a mixture of color and monochrome sensors. [85] The back of a Huawei P30 . It features three rear-facing camera lenses with Leica optics. The first commercial camera phone was the Kyocera Visual Phone VP-210 , released in Japan in May 1999. [86] It was called a "mobile videophone" at the time, [87] and had a 110,000- pixel front-facing camera . [86] It could send up to two images per second over Japan's Personal Handy-phone System (PHS) cellular network , and store up to 20 JPEG digital images , which could be sent over e-mail . [86] The first mass-market camera phone was the J-SH04 , a Sharp J-Phone model sold in Japan in November 2000. [88] [89] It could instantly transmit pictures via cell phone telecommunication . [90] By the mid-2000s, higher-end cell phones commonly had integrated digital cameras. In 2003 camera phones outsold stand-alone digital cameras, and in 2006 they outsold film and digital stand-alone cameras. Five billion camera phones were sold in five years, and by 2007 more than half of the installed base of all mobile phones were camera phones. Sales of separate cameras peaked in 2008. [91] Many early smartphones did not have cameras at all, and earlier models that had them had low performance and insufficient image and video quality that could not compete with budget pocket cameras and fulfill user's needs. [92] By the beginning of the 2010s almost all smartphones had an integrated digital camera. The decline in sales of stand-alone cameras accelerated due to the increasing use of smartphones with rapidly improving camera technology for casual photography, easier image manipulation , and abilities to directly share photos through the use of apps and web-based services. [93] [94] [95] [96] By 2011, cell phones with integrated cameras were selling hundreds of millions per year. In 2015, digital camera sales were 35.395 million units or only less than a third of digital camera sales numbers at their peak and also slightly less than film camera sold number at their peak. [97] [98] Contributing to the rise in popularity of smartphones being used over dedicated cameras for photography, smaller pocket cameras have difficulty producing bokeh in images, but nowadays, some smartphones have dual-lens cameras that reproduce the bokeh effect easily, and can even rearrange the level of bokeh after shooting. This works by capturing multiple images with different focus settings, then combining the background of the main image with a macro focus shot . In 2007 the Nokia N95 was notable as a smartphone that had a 5.0 Megapixel (MP) camera, when most others had cameras with around 3 MP or less than 2 MP. Some specialized feature phones like the LG Viewty , Samsung SGH-G800 , and Sony Ericsson K850i , all released later that year, also had 5.0 MP cameras. By 2010 5.0 MP cameras were common; a few smartphones had 8.0 MP cameras and the Nokia N8 , Sony Ericsson Satio , [99] and Samsung M8910 Pixon12 [100] feature phone had 12 MP. The main camera of the 2009 Nokia N86 uniquely features a three-level aperture lens. [101] The Altek Leo, a 14-megapixel smartphone with 3x optical zoom lens and 720p HD video camera was released in late 2010. [102] The 2012 Samsung Galaxy S3 introduced the ability to capture photos using voice commands . [103] In 2012 Nokia announced and released the Nokia 808 PureView , featuring a 41-megapixel 1/1.2-inch sensor and a high-resolution f/2.4 Zeiss all-aspherical one-group lens. The high resolution enables four times of lossless digital zoom at 1080p and six times at 720p resolution, using image sensor cropping . [104] The 2013 Nokia Lumia 1020 has a similar high-resolution camera setup, with the addition of optical image stabilization and manual camera settings years before common among high-end mobile phones, although lacking expandable storage that could be of use for accordingly high file sizes . Mobile optical image stabilization was first introduced by Nokia in 2012 with the Lumia 920 , and the earliest known smartphone with an optically stabilized front camera is the HTC 10 from 2016. [105] Optical image stabilization enables prolonged exposure times for low-light photography and smoothing out handheld video shaking, since the appearance of shakes magnifies over a larger display such as a monitor or television set , which would be detrimental to the watching experience. Since 2012, smartphones have become increasingly able to capture photos while filming. The resolution of those photos resolution may vary between devices. Samsung has used the highest image sensor resolution at the video's aspect ratio, which at 16:9 is 6 Megapixels (3264 × 1836) on the Galaxy S3 and 9.6 Megapixels (4128 × 2322) on the Galaxy S4 . [106] [107] The earliest iPhones with such functionality, iPhone 5 and 5s , captured simultaneous photos at 0.9 Megapixels (1280 × 720) while filming. [108] Starting in 2013 on the Xperia Z1 , Sony experimented with real-time augmented reality camera effects such as floating text, virtual plants, volcano, and a dinosaur walking in the scenery. [109] Apple later did similarly in 2017 with the iPhone X . [110] In the same year, iOS 7 introduced the later widely implemented viewfinder intuition, where exposure value can be adjusted through vertical swiping, after focus and exposure has been set by tapping, and even while locked after holding down for a brief moment. [111] On some devices, this intuition may be restricted by software in video/slow motion modes and for front camera. In 2013, Samsung unveiled the Galaxy S4 Zoom smartphone with the grip shape of a compact camera and a 10× optical zoom lens, as well as a rotary knob ring around the lens, as used on higher-end compact cameras, and an ISO 1222 tripod mount. It is equipped with manual parameter settings, including for focus and exposure. The successor 2014 Samsung Galaxy K Zoom brought resolution and performance enhancements, but lacks the rotary knob and tripod mount to allow for a more smartphone-like shape with less protruding lens. [112] The 2014 Panasonic Lumix DMC-CM1 was another attempt at mixing mobile phone with compact camera, so much so that it inherited the Lumix brand. While lacking optical zoom, its image sensor has a format of 1", as used in high-end compact cameras such as the Lumix DMC-LX100 and Sony CyberShot DSC-RX100 series, with multiple times the surface size of a typical mobile camera image sensor, as well as support for light sensitivities of up to ISO 25600, well beyond the typical mobile camera light sensitivity range. As of 2021, no successor has been released. [113] [114] In 2013 and 2014, HTC experimentally traded in pixel count for pixel surface size on their One M7 and M8 , both with only four megapixels, marketed as UltraPixel, citing improved brightness and less noise in low light, though the more recent One M8 lacks optical image stabilization . [115] The One M8 additionally was one of the earliest smartphones to be equipped with a dual camera setup. Its software allows generating visual spatial effects such as 3D panning, weather effects, and focus adjustment ("UFocus"), simulating the postphotographic selective focusing capability of images produced by a light-field camera . [116] HTC returned to a high-megapixel single-camera setup on the 2015 One M9 . Meanwhile, in 2014, LG Mobile started experimenting with time-of-flight camera functionality, where a rear laser beam that measures distance accelerates autofocus. Phase-detection autofocus was increasingly adapted throughout the mid-2010s, allowing for quicker and more accurate focusing than contrast detection . In 2016 Apple introduced the iPhone 7 Plus , one of the phones to popularize a dual camera setup. The iPhone 7 Plus included a main 12 MP camera along with a 12 MP telephoto camera. [117] In early 2018 Huawei released a new flagship phone, the Huawei P20 Pro , one of the first triple camera lens setups with Leica optics. [118] In late 2018, Samsung released a new mid-range smartphone, the Galaxy A9 (2018) with the world's first quad camera setup. The Nokia 9 PureView was released in 2019 featuring a penta-lens camera system. [119] 2019 saw the commercialization of high resolution sensors, which use pixel binning to capture more light. 48 MP and 64 MP sensors developed by Sony and Samsung are commonly used by several manufacturers. 108 MP sensors were first implemented in late 2019 and early 2020. Video resolution
Toggle the table of contents Virtual reality This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 4 April 2024. Computer-simulated experience Not to be confused with Simulated reality , Augmented reality , or Virtual economy . An operator controlling The Virtual Interface Environment Workstation (VIEW) [1] at NASA Ames Virtual reality (VR) is a simulated experience that employs 3D near-eye displays and pose tracking to give the user an immersive feel of a virtual world. Applications of virtual reality include entertainment (particularly video games ), education (such as medical, safety or military training) and business (such as virtual meetings). VR is one of the key technologies in the reality-virtuality continuum . As such, it is different from other digital visualization solutions, such as augmented virtuality and augmented reality . [2] Currently, standard virtual reality systems use either virtual reality headsets or multi-projected environments to generate some realistic images, sounds and other sensations that simulate a user's physical presence in a virtual environment. A person using virtual reality equipment is able to look around the artificial world, move around in it, and interact with virtual features or items. The effect is commonly created by VR headsets consisting of a head-mounted display with a small screen in front of the eyes, but can also be created through specially designed rooms with multiple large screens. Virtual reality typically incorporates auditory and video feedback , but may also allow other types of sensory and force feedback through haptic technology . Etymology[ edit ] " Virtual " has had the meaning of "being something in essence or effect, though not actually or in fact" since the mid-1400s. [3] The term "virtual" has been used in the computer sense of "not physically existing but made to appear by software " since 1959. [3] In 1938, French avant-garde playwright Antonin Artaud described the illusory nature of characters and objects in the theatre as "la réalité virtuelle" in a collection of essays, Le Théâtre et son double. The English translation of this book, published in 1958 as The Theater and its Double , [4] is the earliest published use of the term "virtual reality". The term " artificial reality ", coined by Myron Krueger , has been in use since the 1970s. The term "virtual reality" was first used in a science fiction context in The Judas Mandala, a 1982 novel by Damien Broderick . Widespread adoption of the term "virtual reality" in the popular media is attributed to Jaron Lanier , who in the late 1980s designed some of the first business-grade virtual reality hardware under his firm VPL Research , and the 1992 film Lawnmower Man , which features use of virtual reality systems. [5] Forms and methods[ edit ] Further information: Immersion (virtual reality) and Reality–virtuality continuum Researchers with the European Space Agency in Darmstadt , Germany, equipped with a VR headset and motion controllers , demonstrating how astronauts might use virtual reality in the future to train to extinguish a fire inside a lunar habitat One method by which virtual reality can be realized is simulation -based virtual reality. Driving simulators, for example, give the driver on board the impression of actually driving an actual vehicle by predicting vehicular motion caused by driver input and feeding back corresponding visual, motion and audio cues to the driver. With avatar image -based virtual reality, people can join the virtual environment in the form of real video as well as an avatar. One can participate in the 3D distributed virtual environment as form of either a conventional avatar or a real video. Users can select their own type of participation based on the system capability. In projector-based virtual reality, modeling of the real environment plays a vital role in various virtual reality applications, including robot navigation, construction modeling, and airplane simulation. Image-based virtual reality systems have been gaining popularity in computer graphics and computer vision communities. In generating realistic models, it is essential to accurately register acquired 3D data; usually, a camera is used for modeling small objects at a short distance. Desktop-based virtual reality involves displaying a 3D virtual world on a regular desktop display without use of any specialized VR positional tracking equipment. Many modern first-person video games can be used as an example, using various triggers, responsive characters, and other such interactive devices to make the user feel as though they are in a virtual world. A common criticism of this form of immersion is that there is no sense of peripheral vision , limiting the user's ability to know what is happening around them. An Omni treadmill being used at a VR convention A Missouri National Guardsman looks into a VR training head-mounted display at Fort Leonard Wood in 2015. A head-mounted display (HMD) more fully immerses the user in a virtual world. A virtual reality headset typically includes two small high resolution OLED or LCD monitors which provide separate images for each eye for stereoscopic graphics rendering a 3D virtual world, a binaural audio system, positional and rotational real-time head tracking for six degrees of movement. Options include motion controls with haptic feedback for physically interacting within the virtual world in an intuitive way with little to no abstraction and an omnidirectional treadmill for more freedom of physical movement allowing the user to perform locomotive motion in any direction. Augmented reality (AR) is a type of virtual reality technology that blends what the user sees in their real surroundings with digital content generated by computer software. The additional software-generated images with the virtual scene typically enhance how the real surroundings look in some way. AR systems layer virtual information over a camera live feed into a headset or smartglasses or through a mobile device giving the user the ability to view three-dimensional images. Mixed reality (MR) is the merging of the real world and virtual worlds to produce new environments and visualizations where physical and digital objects co-exist and interact in real time. A cyberspace is sometimes defined as a networked virtual reality. [6] Simulated reality is a hypothetical virtual reality as truly immersive as the actual reality , enabling an advanced lifelike experience or even virtual eternity. History[ edit ] View-Master , a stereoscopic visual simulator, was introduced in 1939. The development of perspective in Renaissance European art and the stereoscope invented by Sir Charles Wheatstone were both precursors to virtual reality. [7] [8] [9] The first references to the more modern-day concept of virtual reality came from science fiction . 20th century[ edit ] Morton Heilig wrote in the 1950s of an "Experience Theatre" that could encompass all the senses in an effective manner, thus drawing the viewer into the onscreen activity. He built a prototype of his vision dubbed the Sensorama in 1962, along with five short films to be displayed in it while engaging multiple senses (sight, sound, smell, and touch). Predating digital computing, the Sensorama was a mechanical device . Heilig also developed what he referred to as the "Telesphere Mask" (patented in 1960). The patent application described the device as "a telescopic television apparatus for individual use... The spectator is given a complete sensation of reality, i.e. moving three dimensional images which may be in colour, with 100% peripheral vision, binaural sound, scents and air breezes." [10] In 1968, Ivan Sutherland , with the help of his students including Bob Sproull , created what was widely considered to be the first head-mounted display system for use in immersive simulation applications, called The Sword of Damocles . It was primitive both in terms of user interface and visual realism, and the HMD to be worn by the user was so heavy that it had to be suspended from the ceiling, which gave the device a formidable appearance and inspired its name. [11] Technically, the device was an augmented reality device due to optical passthrough. The graphics comprising the virtual environment were simple wire-frame model rooms. 1970–1990[ edit ] The virtual reality industry mainly provided VR devices for medical, flight simulation, automobile industry design, and military training purposes from 1970 to 1990. [12] David Em became the first artist to produce navigable virtual worlds at NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) from 1977 to 1984. [13] The Aspen Movie Map , a crude virtual tour in which users could wander the streets of Aspen in one of the three modes (summer, winter, and polygons ), was created at MIT in 1978. NASA Ames 's 1985 VIEW headset In 1979, Eric Howlett developed the Large Expanse, Extra Perspective (LEEP) optical system. The combined system created a stereoscopic image with a field-of-view wide enough to create a convincing sense of space. The users of the system have been impressed by the sensation of depth ( field of view ) in the scene and the corresponding realism. The original LEEP system was redesigned for NASA's Ames Research Center in 1985 for their first virtual reality installation, the VIEW (Virtual Interactive Environment Workstation) [14] by Scott Fisher . The LEEP system provides the basis for most of the modern virtual reality headsets. [15] A VPL Research DataSuit, a full-body outfit with sensors for measuring the movement of arms, legs, and trunk. Developed c. 1989. Displayed at the Nissho Iwai showroom in Tokyo By the late 1980s, the term "virtual reality" was popularized by Jaron Lanier , one of the modern pioneers of the field. Lanier had founded the company VPL Research in 1984. VPL Research has developed several VR devices like the DataGlove , the EyePhone, the Reality Built For Two (RB2), and the AudioSphere. VPL licensed the DataGlove technology to Mattel , which used it to make the Power Glove , an early affordable VR device. Atari, Inc. founded a research lab for virtual reality in 1982, but the lab was closed after two years due to the video game crash of 1983 . However, its hired employees, such as Thomas G. Zimmerman, [16] Scott Fisher , Jaron Lanier, Michael Naimark , and Brenda Laurel , kept their research and development on VR-related technologies. In 1988, the Cyberspace Project at Autodesk was the first to implement VR on a low-cost personal computer. [17] [18] The project leader Eric Gullichsen left in 1990 to found Sense8 Corporation and develop the WorldToolKit virtual reality SDK, [19] which offered the first real time graphics with Texture mapping on a PC, and was widely used throughout industry and academia. [20] [21] 1990–2000[ edit ] The 1990s saw the first widespread commercial releases of consumer headsets. In 1992, for instance, Computer Gaming World predicted "affordable VR by 1994". [22] In 1991, Sega announced the Sega VR headset for the Mega Drive home console. It used LCD screens in the visor, stereo headphones, and inertial sensors that allowed the system to track and react to the movements of the user's head. [23] In the same year, Virtuality launched and went on to become the first mass-produced, networked, multiplayer VR entertainment system that was released in many countries, including a dedicated VR arcade at Embarcadero Center . Costing up to $73,000 per multi-pod Virtuality system, they featured headsets and exoskeleton gloves that gave one of the first "immersive" VR experiences. [24] A CAVE system at IDL 's Center for Advanced Energy Studies in 2010 That same year, Carolina Cruz-Neira , Daniel J. Sandin and Thomas A. DeFanti from the Electronic Visualization Laboratory created the first cubic immersive room, the Cave automatic virtual environment (CAVE). Developed as Cruz-Neira's PhD thesis, it involved a multi-projected environment, similar to the holodeck , allowing people to see their own bodies in relation to others in the room. [25] [26] Antonio Medina, a MIT graduate and NASA scientist, designed a virtual reality system to "drive" Mars rovers from Earth in apparent real time despite the substantial delay of Mars-Earth-Mars signals. [27] Virtual Fixtures immersive AR system developed in 1992. Picture features Dr. Louis Rosenberg interacting freely in 3D with overlaid virtual objects called 'fixtures'. In 1992, Nicole Stenger created Angels, the first real-time interactive immersive movie where the interaction was facilitated with a dataglove and high-resolution goggles. That same year, Louis Rosenberg created the virtual fixtures system at the U.S. Air Force 's Armstrong Labs using a full upper-body exoskeleton , enabling a physically realistic mixed reality in 3D. The system enabled the overlay of physically real 3D virtual objects registered with a user's direct view of the real world, producing the first true augmented reality experience enabling sight, sound, and touch. [28] [29] By July 1994, Sega had released the VR-1 motion simulator ride attraction in Joypolis indoor theme parks, [30] as well as the Dennou Senki Net Merc arcade game . Both used an advanced head-mounted display dubbed the "Mega Visor Display" developed in conjunction with Virtuality; [31] [32] it was able to track head movement in a 360-degree stereoscopic 3D environment, and in its Net Merc incarnation was powered by the Sega Model 1 arcade system board . [33] Apple released QuickTime VR , which, despite using the term "VR", was unable to represent virtual reality, and instead displayed 360-degree interactive panoramas . Nintendo 's Virtual Boy console was released in 1995. [34] A group in Seattle created public demonstrations of a "CAVE-like" 270 degree immersive projection room called the Virtual Environment Theater, produced by entrepreneurs Chet Dagit and Bob Jacobson. [35] Forte released the VFX1 , a PC-powered virtual reality headset that same year. In 1999, entrepreneur Philip Rosedale formed Linden Lab with an initial focus on the development of VR hardware. In its earliest form, the company struggled to produce a commercial version of "The Rig", which was realized in prototype form as a clunky steel contraption with several computer monitors that users could wear on their shoulders. The concept was later adapted into the personal computer-based, 3D virtual world program Second Life . [36] 21st century[ edit ] The 2000s were a period of relative public and investment indifference to commercially available VR technologies. In 2001, SAS Cube (SAS3) became the first PC-based cubic room, developed by Z-A Production ( Maurice Benayoun , David Nahon), Barco, and Clarté. It was installed in Laval , France. The SAS library gave birth to Virtools VRPack. In 2007, Google introduced Street View , a service that shows panoramic views of an increasing number of worldwide positions such as roads, indoor buildings and rural areas. It also features a stereoscopic 3D mode, introduced in 2010. [37] 2010–present[ edit ] An inside view of the Oculus Rift Crescent Bay prototype headset In 2010, Palmer Luckey designed the first prototype of the Oculus Rift . This prototype, built on a shell of another virtual reality headset, was only capable of rotational tracking. However, it boasted a 90-degree field of vision that was previously unseen in the consumer market at the time. Luckey eliminated distortion issues arising from the type of lens used to create the wide field of vision using software that pre-distorted the rendered image in real-time. This initial design would later serve as a basis from which the later designs came. [38] In 2012, the Rift is presented for the first time at the E3 video game trade show by John Carmack . [39] [40] In 2014, Facebook purchased Oculus VR for what at the time was stated as $2 billion [41] but later revealed that the more accurate figure was $3 billion. [40] This purchase occurred after the first development kits ordered through Oculus' 2012 Kickstarter had shipped in 2013 but before the shipping of their second development kits in 2014. [42] ZeniMax , Carmack's former employer, sued Oculus and Facebook for taking company secrets to Facebook; [40] the verdict was in favour of ZeniMax, settled out of court later. [43] HTC Vive headsets worn at Mobile World Congress 2018 In 2013, Valve discovered and freely shared the breakthrough of low-persistence displays which make lag-free and smear-free display of VR content possible. [44] This was adopted by Oculus and was used in all their future headsets. In early 2014, Valve showed off their SteamSight prototype, the precursor to both consumer headsets released in 2016. It shared major features with the consumer headsets including separate 1K displays per eye, low persistence, positional tracking over a large area, and Fresnel lenses . [45] [46] HTC and Valve announced the virtual reality headset HTC Vive and controllers in 2015. The set included tracking technology called Lighthouse, which utilized wall-mounted "base stations" for positional tracking using infrared light. [47] [48] [49] The Project Morpheus ( PlayStation VR ) headset worn at Gamescom 2015 In 2014, Sony announced Project Morpheus (its code name for the PlayStation VR ), a virtual reality headset for the PlayStation 4 video game console. [50] In 2015, Google announced Cardboard , a do-it-yourself stereoscopic viewer: the user places their smartphone in the cardboard holder, which they wear on their head. Michael Naimark was appointed Google's first-ever 'resident artist' in their new VR division. The Kickstarter campaign for Gloveone, a pair of gloves providing motion tracking and haptic feedback, was successfully funded, with over $150,000 in contributions. [51] Also in 2015, Razer unveiled its open source project OSVR . Smartphone -based budget headset Samsung Gear VR in dismantled state By 2016, there were at least 230 companies developing VR-related products. Amazon , Apple, Facebook, Google, Microsoft , Sony and Samsung all had dedicated AR and VR groups. Dynamic binaural audio was common to most headsets released that year. However, haptic interfaces were not well developed, and most hardware packages incorporated button-operated handsets for touch-based interactivity. Visually, displays were still of a low-enough resolution and frame rate that images were still identifiable as virtual. [52] In 2016, HTC shipped its first units of the HTC Vive SteamVR headset. [53] This marked the first major commercial release of sensor-based tracking, allowing for free movement of users within a defined space. [54] A patent filed by Sony in 2017 showed they were developing a similar location tracking technology to the Vive for PlayStation VR, with the potential for the development of a wireless headset. [55] In 2019, Oculus released the Oculus Rift S and a standalone headset, the Oculus Quest . These headsets utilized inside-out tracking compared to external outside-in tracking seen in previous generations of headsets. [56] Later in 2019, Valve released the Valve Index . Notable features include a 130° field of view, off-ear headphones for immersion and comfort, open-handed controllers which allow for individual finger tracking, front facing cameras, and a front expansion slot meant for extensibility. [57] In 2020, Oculus released the Oculus Quest 2 . Some new features include a sharper screen, reduced price, and increased performance. Facebook (which became Meta a year later) initially required users to log in with a Facebook account in order to use the new headset. [58] In 2021 the Oculus Quest 2 accounted for 80% of all VR headsets sold. [59] Robinson R22 Virtual Reality Training Device developed by VRM Switzerland [60] In 2021, EASA approved the first Virtual Reality based Flight Simulation Training Device. The device, for rotorcraft pilots, enhances safety by opening up the possibility of practicing risky maneuvers in a virtual environment. This addresses a key risk area in rotorcraft operations, [61] where statistics show that around 20% of accidents occur during training flights. In 2023, Sony released the PlayStation VR2 , a follow-up to their 2016 headset. PlayStation VR2 comes with inside-out tracking, higher-resolution displays, controllers with adaptive triggers and haptic feedback, and a wider field-of-view . [62] In June 2023, Apple announced the Apple Vision Pro . This marks their first venture into the VR headset market. The device uses a mix of AR and VR to produce visuals and is one of the only mainstream headsets to purely use hand-tracking and nothing else for controllers. With the potential integration of ChatGPT users of Apple Vision can benefit from technology like real-time translation. This will also allow users to be able to see information about items they are looking at in real time. [63] Software[ edit ] The Virtual Reality Modelling Language (VRML), first introduced in 1994, was intended for the development of "virtual worlds" without dependency on headsets. [64] The Web3D consortium was subsequently founded in 1997 for the development of industry standards for web-based 3D graphics. The consortium subsequently developed X3D from the VRML framework as an archival, open-source standard for web-based distribution of VR content. [65] WebVR is an experimental JavaScript application programming interface (API) that provides support for various virtual reality devices, such as the HTC Vive, Oculus Rift, Google Cardboard or OSVR, in a web browser . [66] See also: List of virtual reality headsets Paramount for the sensation of immersion into virtual reality are a high frame rate and low latency . Modern virtual reality headset displays are based on technology developed for smartphones including: gyroscopes and motion sensors for tracking head, body, and hand positions ; small HD screens for stereoscopic displays; and small, lightweight and fast computer processors. These components led to relative affordability for independent VR developers, and led to the 2012 Oculus Rift Kickstarter offering the first independently developed VR headset. [52] Independent production of VR images and video has increased alongside the development of affordable omnidirectional cameras , also known as 360-degree cameras or VR cameras, that have the ability to record 360 interactive photography , although at relatively low resolutions or in highly compressed formats for online streaming of 360 video . [67] In contrast, photogrammetry is increasingly used to combine several high-resolution photographs for the creation of detailed 3D objects and environments in VR applications. [68] [69] To create a feeling of immersion, special output devices are needed to display virtual worlds. Well-known formats include head-mounted displays or the CAVE. In order to convey a spatial impression, two images are generated and displayed from different perspectives (stereo projection). There are different technologies available to bring the respective image to the right eye. A distinction is made between active (e.g. shutter glasses ) and passive technologies (e.g. polarizing filters or Infitec ). [70] In order to improve the feeling of immersion, wearable multi-string cables offer haptics to complex geometries in virtual reality. These strings offer fine control of each finger joint to simulate the haptics involved in touching these virtual geometries. [71] Special input devices are required for interaction with the virtual world. Some of the most common input devices are motion controllers and optical tracking sensors. In some cases, wired gloves are used. Controllers typically use optical tracking systems (primarily infrared cameras ) for location and navigation, so that the user can move freely without wiring. Some input devices provide the user with force feedback to the hands or other parts of the body, so that the user can orientate themselves in the three-dimensional world through haptics and sensor technology as a further sensory sensation and carry out realistic simulations. This allows for the viewer to have a sense of direction in the artificial landscape. Additional haptic feedback can be obtained from omnidirectional treadmills (with which walking in virtual space is controlled by real walking movements) and vibration gloves and suits. Virtual reality cameras can be used to create VR photography using 360-degree panorama videos . 360-degree camera shots can be mixed with virtual elements to merge reality and fiction through special effects. Virtual reality cameras can be used as a steppingstone to make realistic holographic displays these cameras can be used to cover every angle of the needed experience. [72] VR cameras are available in various formats, with varying numbers of lenses installed in the camera. [73] Visual immersion experience[ edit ] Display resolution[ edit ] Minimal Angle of Resolution (MAR) refers to the minimum distance between two display pixels. At the distance, viewer can clearly distinguish the independent pixels. Often measured in arc-seconds, MAR between two pixels has to do with the viewing distance. For the general public, resolution is about 30-65 arc-seconds, which is referred to as the spatial resolution when combined with distance. Given the viewing distance of 1m and 2m respectively, regular viewers won't be able to perceive two pixels as separate if they are less than 0.29mm apart at 1m and less than 0.58mm apart at 2m. [74] Image latency and display refresh frequency[ edit ] Most small-size displays have a refresh rate of 60 Hz, which adds about 15ms of additional latency. The number is reduced to less than 7ms if the refresh rate is increased to 120 Hz or even 240 Hz and more. [75] Participants generally feel that the experience is more immersive with higher refresh rates as a result. However, higher refresh rates require a more powerful graphics processing unit . Relationship between display and field of view[ edit ] In theory, VR represents a participant's field of view (yellow area). In assessing the achieved immersion by a VR device, we need to consider our field of view ( FOV ) in addition to image quality. Our eyes have a horizontal FOV from about 107 or 110 degrees to the temporal side to about 60 or 70 degrees toward the nose, and a vertical FOV from about 95 degrees downward to 85 degrees upward, [76] and eye movements are estimated as roughly 30 deg to either side horizontally and 20 vertically. Binocular vision is limited to the 120 or 140 degrees where the right and the left visual fields overlap. With eye movements, we have a FOV of roughly 300 degrees x 175 degrees with two eyes, i.e., approximately one third of the full 360-deg sphere. Main article: Virtual reality applications Virtual reality is most commonly used in entertainment applications such as video games , 3D cinema , amusement park rides including dark rides and social virtual worlds . Consumer virtual reality headsets were first released by video game companies in the early-mid 1990s. Beginning in the 2010s, next-generation commercial tethered headsets were released by Oculus (Rift), HTC (Vive) and Sony (PlayStation VR), setting off a new wave of application development. [77] 3D cinema has been used for sporting events, pornography, fine art, music videos and short films. Since 2015, roller coasters and theme parks have incorporated virtual reality to match visual effects with haptic feedback. [52] VR not only fits the trend of the digital industry but also enhances the film's visual effect. The film gives the audience more ways to interact through VR technology. [78] In social sciences and psychology, virtual reality offers a cost-effective tool to study and replicate interactions in a controlled environment. [79] It can be used as a form of therapeutic intervention. [80] For instance, there is the case of the virtual reality exposure therapy (VRET), a form of exposure therapy for treating anxiety disorders such as post traumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) and phobias. [81] [82] [83] A VR therapy has been designed to help people with psychosis and agoraphobia manage their avoidance of outside environments. In the therapy, the user wears a headset and a virtual character provides psychological advice and guides them as they explore simulated environments (such as a cafe or a busy street). NICE is assessing the therapy to see if it should be recommended on the NHS . [84] [85] During the COVID-19 pandemic, social VR has also been used as a mental-health tool in a form of self-administered, non-traditional cognitive behavioural therapy . [86] Virtual reality programs are being used in the rehabilitation processes with elderly individuals that have been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease . This gives these elderly patients the opportunity to simulate real experiences that they would not otherwise be able to experience due to their current state. 17 recent studies with randomized controlled trials have shown that virtual reality applications are effective in treating cognitive deficits with neurological diagnoses. [87] Loss of mobility in elderly patients can lead to a sense of loneliness and depression. Virtual reality is able to assist in making aging in place a lifeline to an outside world that they cannot easily navigate. Virtual reality allows exposure therapy to take place in a safe environment. [88] In medicine, simulated VR surgical environments were first developed in the 1990s. [89] [90] [91] Under the supervision of experts, VR can provide effective and repeatable training [92] at a low cost, allowing trainees to recognize and amend errors as they occur. [93] Virtual reality has been used in physical rehabilitation since the 2000s. Despite numerous studies conducted, good quality evidence of its efficacy compared to other rehabilitation methods without sophisticated and expensive equipment is lacking for the treatment of Parkinson's disease . [94] A 2018 review on the effectiveness of mirror therapy by virtual reality and robotics for any type of pathology concluded in a similar way. [95] Another study was conducted that showed the potential for VR to promote mimicry and revealed the difference between neurotypical and autism spectrum disorder individuals in their response to a two-dimensional avatar. [96] [97] Immersive virtual reality technology with myoelectric and motion tracking control may represent a possible therapy option for treatment-resistant phantom limb pain. Pain scale measurements were taken into account and an interactive 3-D kitchen environment was developed based on the principles of mirror therapy to allow for control of virtual hands while wearing a motion-tracked VR headset. [98] A systematic search in Pubmed and Embase was performed to determine results that were pooled in two meta-analysis. Meta-analysis showed a significant result in favor of VRT for balance. [99] In the fast-paced and globalised business world, meetings in VR are used to create an environment in which interactions with other people (e.g. colleagues, customers, partners) can feel more natural than a phone call or video chat. In the customisable meeting rooms all parties can join using the VR headset and interact as if they are in the same physical room. Presentations, videos or 3D models (of e.g. products or prototypes) can be uploaded and interacted with. [100] Compared to traditional text-based CMC, Avatar-based interactions in 3D virtual environment lead to higher levels of consensus, satisfaction, and cohesion among group members. [101] U.S. Navy Hospital Corpsman demonstrating a VR parachute simulator at the Naval Survival Training Institute in 2006 VR can simulate real workspaces for workplace occupational safety and health purposes, educational purposes, and training purposes. It can be used to provide learners with a virtual environment where they can develop their skills without the real-world consequences of failing. It has been used and studied in primary education , [102] anatomy teaching, [103] [104] military, [105] [106] astronaut training, [107] [108] [109] flight simulators, [110] miner training, [111] medical education, [112] geography education, [113] architectural design,[ citation needed ] driver training [114] and bridge inspection. [115] Immersive VR engineering systems enable engineers to see virtual prototypes prior to the availability of any physical prototypes. [116] Supplementing training with virtual training environments has been claimed to offer avenues of realism in military [117] and healthcare [118] training while minimizing cost. [119] It also has been claimed to reduce military training costs by minimizing the amounts of ammunition expended during training periods. [117] VR can be used for the healthcare training and education for medical practitioners. [120] [121] Further, several application have been developed for multiple types of safety training. [122] [123] The latest results indicates that virtual reality safety training is more effective than traditional training in terms of knowledge acquisition and knowledge retention. [124] In the engineering field, VR has proved very useful for both engineering educators and the students. A previously expensive cost in the educational department now being much more accessible due to lowered overall costs, has proven to be a very useful tool in educating future engineers. The most significant element lies in the ability for the students to be able to interact with 3-D models that accurately respond based on real world possibilities. This added tool of education provides many the immersion needed to grasp complex topics and be able to apply them. [125] As noted, the future architects and engineers benefit greatly by being able to form understandings between spatial relationships and providing solutions based on real-world future applications. [126] The first fine art virtual world was created in the 1970s. [127] As the technology developed, more artistic programs were produced throughout the 1990s, including feature films. When commercially available technology became more widespread, VR festivals began to emerge in the mid-2010s. The first uses of VR in museum settings began in the 1990s, seeing a significant increase in the mid-2010s. Additionally, museums have begun making some of their content virtual reality accessible. [128] [129] Virtual reality's growing market presents an opportunity and an alternative channel for digital marketing . [130] It is also seen as a new platform for e-commerce , particularly in the bid to challenge traditional "brick and mortar" retailers. However, a 2018 study revealed that the majority of goods are still purchased in physical stores. [131] In the case of education, the uses of virtual reality have demonstrated being capable of promoting higher order thinking, [132] promoting the interest and commitment of students, the acquisition of knowledge, promoting mental habits and understanding that are generally useful within an academic context. [133] A case has also been made for including virtual reality technology in the context of public libraries. This would give library users access to cutting-edge technology and unique educational experiences. [134] This could include giving users access to virtual, interactive copies of rare texts and artifacts and to tours of famous landmarks and archeological digs (as in the case with the Virtual Ganjali Khan Project). [135] Starting in the early 2020s, virtual reality has also been discussed as a technological setting that may support people's grieving process, based on digital recreations of deceased individuals. In 2021, this practice received substantial media attention following a South Korean TV documentary, which invited a grieving mother to interact with a virtual replica of her deceased daughter. [136] Subsequently, scientists have summarized several potential implications of such endeavours, including its potential to facilitate adaptive mourning, but also many ethical challenges. [137] [138] Growing interest in the metaverse has resulted in organizational efforts to incorporate the many diverse applications of virtual reality into ecosystems like VIVERSE , reportedly offering connectivity between platforms for a wide range of uses. [139] Concerts[ edit ] In June of 2020, Jean Michel Jarre performed in VRChat . [140] In July, Brendan Bradley released the free FutureStages web-based virtual reality venue for live events and concerts throughout the 2020 shutdown, [141] Justin Bieber performed on November 18, 2021 in WaveXR. [142] On December 2, 2021, non-player characters performed at the Mugar Omni Theater with audiences interacting with a live performer in both virtual reality and projected on the IMAX dome screen. [143] [144] Meta's Foo Fighters Super Bowl VR concert performed on Venues. [145] Post Malone performed in Venues starting July 15, 2022. [146] Megan Thee Stallion performed on AmazeVR at AMC Theaters throughout 2022. [147] On October 24, 2021, Billie Eilish performed on Oculus Venues. Pop group Imagine Dragons performed on June 15, 2022. Concerns and challenges[ edit ] Health and safety[ edit ] There are many health and safety considerations of virtual reality. A number of unwanted symptoms have been caused by prolonged use of virtual reality, [148] and these may have slowed proliferation of the technology. Most virtual reality systems come with consumer warnings, including: seizures; developmental issues in children; trip-and-fall and collision warnings; discomfort; repetitive stress injury; and interference with medical devices. [149] Some users may experience twitches, seizures or blackouts while using VR headsets, even if they do not have a history of epilepsy and have never had blackouts or seizures before. One in 4,000 people, or .025%, may experience these symptoms. Motion sickness, eyestrain, headaches, and discomfort are the most prevalent short-term adverse effects. In addition, because of the virtual reality headsets' heavy weight, discomfort may be more likely among children. Therefore, children are advised against using VR headsets. [150] Other problems may occur in physical interactions with one's environment. While wearing VR headsets, people quickly lose awareness of their real-world surroundings and may injure themselves by tripping over, or colliding with real-world objects. [151] VR headsets may regularly cause eye fatigue, as does all screened technology, because people tend to blink less when watching screens, causing their eyes to become more dried out. [152] There have been some concerns about VR headsets contributing to myopia, but although VR headsets sit close to the eyes, they may not necessarily contribute to nearsightedness if the focal length of the image being displayed is sufficiently far away. [153] Virtual reality sickness (also known as cybersickness) occurs when a person's exposure to a virtual environment causes symptoms that are similar to motion sickness symptoms. [154] Women are significantly more affected than men by headset-induced symptoms, at rates of around 77% and 33% respectively. [155] [156] The most common symptoms are general discomfort, headache, stomach awareness, nausea, vomiting, pallor, sweating, fatigue, drowsiness, disorientation, and apathy. [157] For example, Nintendo's Virtual Boy received much criticism for its negative physical effects, including "dizziness, nausea, and headaches". [158] These motion sickness symptoms are caused by a disconnect between what is being seen and what the rest of the body perceives. When the vestibular system, the body's internal balancing system, does not experience the motion that it expects from visual input through the eyes, the user may experience VR sickness. This can also happen if the VR system does not have a high enough frame rate, or if there is a lag between the body's movement and the onscreen visual reaction to it. [159] Because approximately 25–40% of people experience some kind of VR sickness when using VR machines, companies are actively looking for ways to reduce VR sickness. [160] Vergence-accommodation conflict (VAC) is one of the main causes of virtual reality sickness. [161] In January 2022 The Wall Street Journal found that VR usage could lead to physical injuries including leg, hand, arm and shoulder injuries. [162] VR usage has also been tied to incidents that resulted in neck injuries (especially injures to the cervical vertebrae ). [163] Children and teenagers in virtual reality[ edit ] Children are becoming increasingly aware of VR, with the number in the USA having never heard of it dropping by half from Autumn 2016 (40%) to Spring 2017 (19%). [164] A 2022 research report by Piper Sandler revealed that only 26% of U.S. teens own a VR device, 5% use it daily, while 48% of teen headset owners "seldom" use it. Of the teens who don't own a VR headset , 9% plan to buy one. 50% of surveyed teens are unsure about the metaverse or don't have any interest, and don't have any plans to purchase a VR headset. [165] Studies show that young children, compared to adults, may respond cognitively and behaviorally to immersive VR in ways that differ from adults. VR places users directly into the media content, potentially making the experience very vivid and real for children. For example, children of 6–18 years of age reported higher levels of presence and "realness" of a virtual environment compared with adults 19–65 years of age. [166] Studies on VR consumer behavior or its effect on children and a code of ethical conduct involving underage users are especially needed, given the availability of VR porn and violent content. Related research on violence in video games suggests that exposure to media violence may affect attitudes, behavior, and even self-concept. Self-concept is a key indicator of core attitudes and coping abilities, particularly in adolescents. [167] Early studies conducted on observing versus participating in violent VR games suggest that physiological arousal and aggressive thoughts, but not hostile feelings, are higher for participants than for observers of the virtual reality game. [168] Experiencing VR by children may further involve simultaneously holding the idea of the virtual world in mind while experiencing the physical world. Excessive usage of immersive technology that has very salient sensory features may compromise children's ability to maintain the rules of the physical world, particularly when wearing a VR headset that blocks out the location of objects in the physical world. Immersive VR can provide users with multisensory experiences that replicate reality or create scenarios that are impossible or dangerous in the physical world. Observations of 10 children experiencing VR for the first time suggested that 8-12-years-old kids were more confident to explore VR content when it was in a familiar situation, e.g. the children enjoyed playing in the kitchen context of Job Simulator , and enjoyed breaking rules by engaging in activities they are not allowed to do in reality, such as setting things on fire. [164] Privacy[ edit ] Digital privacy concerns have been associated with VR platforms; [169] [170] the persistent tracking required by all VR systems makes the technology particularly useful for, and vulnerable to, mass surveillance , including information gathering of personal actions, movements and responses. [52] Data from eye tracking sensors, which are projected to become a standard feature in virtual reality headsets, [171] [172] may indirectly reveal information about a user's ethnicity, personality traits, fears, emotions, interests, skills, and physical and mental health conditions. [173] The nature of VR technology means that it can gather a wide range of data about its users. This can include obvious information such as usernames and account information, but also extends to more personal data like physical movements, interaction habits, and responses to virtual environments. In addition, advanced VR systems can capture biometric data like voice patterns, eye movements, and physiological responses to VR experiences. [174] [175] Virtual reality technology has grown substantially since its inception, moving from a niche technology to a mainstream consumer product. As the user base has grown, so too has the amount of personal data collected by these systems. [176] This data can be used to improve VR systems, to provide personalized experiences, or to collect demographic information for marketing purposes. However, it also raises significant privacy concerns, especially when this data is stored, shared, or sold without the user's explicit consent. [177] Existing data protection and privacy laws like the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the EU, and the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) in the United States, can be applied to VR. These regulations require companies to disclose how they collect and use data, and give users a degree of control over their personal information. [178] Despite these regulations, enforcing privacy laws in VR can be challenging due to the global nature of the technology and the vast amounts of data collected. [179] Due to its history of privacy issues, the involvement of Meta Platforms (formerly Facebook, Inc.) in the VR market has led to privacy concerns specific to its platforms . In August 2020, Facebook announced that Oculus products would become subject to the terms of use and privacy policy of the Facebook social network, and that a Facebook account would be required to use future Oculus headset models, and all existing models (via deprecation of the separate Oculus account system) beginning January 2023. The announcement was criticized for the mandatory integration of Oculus headsets with Facebook data collection and policies (including the Facebook real-name policy ), and preventing use of the hardware if the user's account is suspended. [180] [181] [182] The following month, Facebook halted the sale of Oculus products in Germany due to concerns from regulators that the new policy was a violation of GDPR. [183] In 2022, the company would later establish a separate "Meta account" system. [184] Virtual reality in fiction[ edit ]
Toggle the table of contents Augmented reality From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia View of the real world with computer-generated supplementary features Virtual Fixtures – first AR system, U.S. Air Force, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base (1992) Augmented reality (AR) is an interactive experience that combines the real world and computer-generated content. The content can span multiple sensory modalities , including visual , auditory , haptic , somatosensory and olfactory . [1] AR can be defined as a system that incorporates three basic features: a combination of real and virtual worlds, real-time interaction, and accurate 3D registration of virtual and real objects. [2] The overlaid sensory information can be constructive (i.e. additive to the natural environment), or destructive (i.e. masking of the natural environment). [3] As such, it is one of the key technologies in the reality-virtuality continuum . [4] This experience is seamlessly interwoven with the physical world such that it is perceived as an immersive aspect of the real environment. [3] In this way, augmented reality alters one's ongoing perception of a real-world environment, whereas virtual reality completely replaces the user's real-world environment with a simulated one. [5] [6] Augmented reality is largely synonymous with mixed reality . There is also overlap in terminology with extended reality and computer-mediated reality . The primary value of augmented reality is the manner in which components of the digital world blend into a person's perception of the real world, not as a simple display of data, but through the integration of immersive sensations, which are perceived as natural parts of an environment. The earliest functional AR systems that provided immersive mixed reality experiences for users were invented in the early 1990s, starting with the Virtual Fixtures system developed at the U.S. Air Force's Armstrong Laboratory in 1992. [3] [7] [8] Commercial augmented reality experiences were first introduced in entertainment and gaming businesses. [9] Subsequently, augmented reality applications have spanned commercial industries such as education, communications, medicine, and entertainment. In education, content may be accessed by scanning or viewing an image with a mobile device or by using markerless AR techniques. [10] [11] [12] Augmented reality can be used to enhance natural environments or situations and offers perceptually enriched experiences. With the help of advanced AR technologies (e.g. adding computer vision , incorporating AR cameras into smartphone applications, and object recognition ) the information about the surrounding real world of the user becomes interactive and digitally manipulated. [13] Information about the environment and its objects is overlaid on the real world. This information can be virtual. Augmented Reality is any experience which is artificial and which adds to the already existing reality. [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] or real, e.g. seeing other real sensed or measured information such as electromagnetic radio waves overlaid in exact alignment with where they actually are in space. [19] [20] [21] Augmented reality also has a lot of potential in the gathering and sharing of tacit knowledge. Augmentation techniques are typically performed in real-time and in semantic contexts with environmental elements. Immersive perceptual information is sometimes combined with supplemental information like scores over a live video feed of a sporting event. This combines the benefits of both augmented reality technology and heads up display technology (HUD). Comparison with virtual reality[ edit ] In virtual reality (VR), the users' perception of reality is completely based on virtual information. In augmented reality (AR) the user is provided with additional computer- generated information within the data collected from real life that enhances their perception of reality. [22] [23] For example, in architecture, VR can be used to create a walk-through simulation of the inside of a new building; and AR can be used to show a building's structures and systems super-imposed on a real-life view. Another example is through the use of utility applications. Some AR applications, such as Augment , enable users to apply digital objects into real environments, allowing businesses to use augmented reality devices as a way to preview their products in the real world. [24] Similarly, it can also be used to demo what products may look like in an environment for customers, as demonstrated by companies such as Mountain Equipment Co-op or Lowe's who use augmented reality to allow customers to preview what their products might look like at home through the use of 3D models. [25] Augmented reality (AR) differs from virtual reality (VR) in the sense that in AR part of the surrounding environment is 'real' and AR is just adding layers of virtual objects to the real environment. On the other hand, in VR the surrounding environment is completely virtual and computer generated. A demonstration of how AR layers objects onto the real world can be seen with augmented reality games. WallaMe is an augmented reality game application that allows users to hide messages in real environments, utilizing geolocation technology in order to enable users to hide messages wherever they may wish in the world. [26] Such applications have many uses in the world, including in activism and artistic expression. [27] History[ edit ] 1901: L. Frank Baum , an author, first mentions the idea of an electronic display/spectacles that overlays data onto real life (in this case 'people'). It is named a 'character marker'. [28] 1957–62: Morton Heilig , a cinematographer, creates and patents a simulator called Sensorama with visuals, sound, vibration, and smell. 1968: Ivan Sutherland invents the head-mounted display and positions it as a window into a virtual world. [29] 1975: Myron Krueger creates Videoplace to allow users to interact with virtual objects. 1980: The research by Gavan Lintern of the University of Illinois is the first published work to show the value of a heads up display for teaching real-world flight skills. [30] 1980: Steve Mann creates the first wearable computer, a computer vision system with text and graphical overlays on a photographically mediated scene. [31] See EyeTap . See Heads Up Display . 1981: Dan Reitan geospatially maps multiple weather radar images and space-based and studio cameras to earth maps and abstract symbols for television weather broadcasts, bringing a precursor concept to augmented reality (mixed real/graphical images) to TV. [32] 1986: Within IBM, Ron Feigenblatt describes the most widely experienced form of AR today (viz. "magic window," e.g. smartphone -based Pokémon Go ), use of a small, "smart" flat panel display positioned and oriented by hand. [33] [34] 1987: Douglas George and Robert Morris create a working prototype of an astronomical telescope-based " heads-up display " system (a precursor concept to augmented reality) which superimposed in the telescope eyepiece, over the actual sky images, multi-intensity star, and celestial body images, and other relevant information. [35] 1990: The term augmented reality is attributed to Thomas P. Caudell, a former Boeing researcher. [36] 1992: Louis Rosenberg developed one of the first functioning AR systems, called Virtual Fixtures , at the United States Air Force Research Laboratory—Armstrong, that demonstrated benefit to human perception. [37] 1992: Steven Feiner, Blair MacIntyre and Doree Seligmann present an early paper on an AR system prototype, KARMA, at the Graphics Interface conference. 1993: CMOS active-pixel sensor , a type of metal–oxide–semiconductor (MOS) image sensor , developed at NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory . [38] CMOS sensors are later widely used for optical tracking in AR technology. [39] 1993: Mike Abernathy, et al., report the first use of augmented reality in identifying space debris using Rockwell WorldView by overlaying satellite geographic trajectories on live telescope video. [40] 1993: A widely cited version of the paper above is published in Communications of the ACM – Special issue on computer augmented environments, edited by Pierre Wellner, Wendy Mackay, and Rich Gold. [41] 1993: Loral WDL , with sponsorship from STRICOM , performed the first demonstration combining live AR-equipped vehicles and manned simulators. Unpublished paper, J. Barrilleaux, "Experiences and Observations in Applying Augmented Reality to Live Training", 1999. [42] 1994: Julie Martin creates first 'Augmented Reality Theater production', Dancing in Cyberspace, funded by the Australia Council for the Arts , features dancers and acrobats manipulating body–sized virtual object in real time, projected into the same physical space and performance plane. The acrobats appeared immersed within the virtual object and environments. The installation used Silicon Graphics computers and Polhemus sensing system. 1996: General Electric develops system for projecting information from 3D CAD models onto real-world instances of those models. [43] 1998: Spatial augmented reality introduced at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill by Ramesh Raskar , Welch, Henry Fuchs . [44] 1999: Frank Delgado, Mike Abernathy et al. report successful flight test of LandForm software video map overlay from a helicopter at Army Yuma Proving Ground overlaying video with runways, taxiways, roads and road names. [45] [46] 1999: The US Naval Research Laboratory engages on a decade-long research program called the Battlefield Augmented Reality System (BARS) to prototype some of the early wearable systems for dismounted soldier operating in urban environment for situation awareness and training. [47] 1999: NASA X-38 flown using LandForm software video map overlays at Dryden Flight Research Center . [48] 2000: Rockwell International Science Center demonstrates tetherless wearable augmented reality systems receiving analog video and 3-D Audio over radio-frequency wireless channels. The systems incorporate outdoor navigation capabilities, with digital horizon silhouettes from a terrain database overlain in real time on the live outdoor scene, allowing visualization of terrain made invisible by clouds and fog. [49] [50] 2003: Sony released the EyeToy colour webcam, their first foray into Augmented Reality on PlayStation 2 . [51] 2004: An outdoor helmet-mounted AR system was demonstrated by Trimble Navigation and the Human Interface Technology Laboratory (HIT lab). [52] 2006: Outland Research develops AR media player that overlays virtual content onto a users view of the real world synchronously with playing music, thereby providing an immersive AR entertainment experience. [53] [54] 2008: Wikitude AR Travel Guide launches on 20 Oct 2008 with the G1 Android phone . [55] 2009: ARToolkit was ported to Adobe Flash (FLARToolkit) by Saqoosha, bringing augmented reality to the web browser. [56] 2011: Ogmento launches Paranormal Activity: Sanctuary, the first location-based augmented reality game on mobile. [57] 2012: Launch of Lyteshot , an interactive AR gaming platform that utilizes smart glasses for game data 2015: Microsoft announced the HoloLens augmented reality headset, which uses various sensors and a processing unit to blend high definition "holograms" with the real world. [58] 2016: Niantic released Pokémon Go for iOS and Android in July 2016. The game quickly became one of the most popular smartphone applications and in turn spikes the popularity of augmented reality games. [59] 2017: Magic Leap announced the use of Digital Lightfield technology embedded into the Magic Leap One headset. The creators edition headset includes the glasses and a computing pack worn on your belt. [60] 2018: Leap Motion announced the Project North Star augmented reality headset, and later released it under an open source license. [61] [62] [63] [64] 2019: Microsoft announced HoloLens 2 with significant improvements in terms of field of view and ergonomics. [65] 2022: Magic Leap launched the Magic Leap 2 headset. [66] Hardware[ edit ] A man wearing an augmented reality headset Augmented reality requires hardware components including a processor, display, sensors, and input devices. Modern mobile computing devices like smartphones and tablet computers contain these elements, which often include a camera and microelectromechanical systems ( MEMS ) sensors such as an accelerometer , GPS , and solid state compass , making them suitable AR platforms. [67] [68] Displays[ edit ] Various technologies can be used to display augmented reality, including optical projection systems , monitors , and handheld devices . Two of the display technologies used in augmented reality are diffractive waveguides and reflective waveguides. A head-mounted display (HMD) is a display device worn on the forehead, such as a harness or helmet-mounted . HMDs place images of both the physical world and virtual objects over the user's field of view. Modern HMDs often employ sensors for six degrees of freedom monitoring that allow the system to align virtual information to the physical world and adjust accordingly with the user's head movements. [69] [70] [71] HMDs can provide VR users with mobile and collaborative experiences. [72] Specific providers, such as uSens and Gestigon , include gesture controls for full virtual immersion . [73] [74] Vuzix is a company that has produced a number of head-worn optical see through displays marketed for augmented reality. [75] [76] [77] Eyeglasses[ edit ] AR displays can be rendered on devices resembling eyeglasses. Versions include eyewear that employs cameras to intercept the real world view and re-display its augmented view through the eyepieces [78] and devices in which the AR imagery is projected through or reflected off the surfaces of the eyewear lens pieces. [79] [80] [81] The EyeTap (also known as Generation-2 Glass [82] ) captures rays of light that would otherwise pass through the center of the lens of the wearer's eye, and substitutes synthetic computer-controlled light for each ray of real light. The Generation-4 Glass [82] (Laser EyeTap) is similar to the VRD (i.e. it uses a computer-controlled laser light source) except that it also has infinite depth of focus and causes the eye itself to, in effect, function as both a camera and a display by way of exact alignment with the eye and resynthesis (in laser light) of rays of light entering the eye. [83] Main article: Head-up display A head-up display (HUD) is a transparent display that presents data without requiring users to look away from their usual viewpoints. A precursor technology to augmented reality, heads-up displays were first developed for pilots in the 1950s, projecting simple flight data into their line of sight, thereby enabling them to keep their "heads up" and not look down at the instruments. Near-eye augmented reality devices can be used as portable head-up displays as they can show data, information, and images while the user views the real world. Many definitions of augmented reality only define it as overlaying the information. [84] [85] This is basically what a head-up display does; however, practically speaking, augmented reality is expected to include registration and tracking between the superimposed perceptions, sensations, information, data, and images and some portion of the real world. [86] Contact lenses[ edit ] Contact lenses that display AR imaging are in development. These bionic contact lenses might contain the elements for display embedded into the lens including integrated circuitry, LEDs and an antenna for wireless communication. The first contact lens display was patented in 1999 by Steve Mann and was intended to work in combination with AR spectacles, but the project was abandoned, [87] [88] then 11 years later in 2010–2011. [89] [90] [91] [92] Another version of contact lenses, in development for the U.S. military, is designed to function with AR spectacles, allowing soldiers to focus on close-to-the-eye AR images on the spectacles and distant real world objects at the same time. [93] [94] At CES 2013, a company called Innovega also unveiled similar contact lenses that required being combined with AR glasses to work. [95] Many scientists have been working on contact lenses capable of different technological feats. A patent filed by Samsung describes an AR contact lens, that, when finished, will include a built-in camera on the lens itself. [96] The design is intended to control its interface by blinking an eye. It is also intended to be linked with the user's smartphone to review footage, and control it separately. When successful, the lens would feature a camera, or sensor inside of it. It is said that it could be anything from a light sensor, to a temperature sensor. The first publicly unveiled working prototype of an AR contact lens not requiring the use of glasses in conjunction was developed by Mojo Vision and announced and shown off at CES 2020. [97] [98] [99] Virtual retinal display[ edit ] A virtual retinal display (VRD) is a personal display device under development at the University of Washington 's Human Interface Technology Laboratory under Dr. Thomas A. Furness III. [100] With this technology, a display is scanned directly onto the retina of a viewer's eye. This results in bright images with high resolution and high contrast. The viewer sees what appears to be a conventional display floating in space. [101] Several of tests were done to analyze the safety of the VRD. [100] In one test, patients with partial loss of vision—having either macular degeneration (a disease that degenerates the retina) or keratoconus —were selected to view images using the technology. In the macular degeneration group, five out of eight subjects preferred the VRD images to the cathode-ray tube (CRT) or paper images and thought they were better and brighter and were able to see equal or better resolution levels. The Keratoconus patients could all resolve smaller lines in several line tests using the VRD as opposed to their own correction. They also found the VRD images to be easier to view and sharper. As a result of these several tests, virtual retinal display is considered safe technology. Virtual retinal display creates images that can be seen in ambient daylight and ambient room light. The VRD is considered a preferred candidate to use in a surgical display due to its combination of high resolution and high contrast and brightness. Additional tests show high potential for VRD to be used as a display technology for patients that have low vision. Handheld[ edit ] A Handheld display employs a small display that fits in a user's hand. All handheld AR solutions to date opt for video see-through. Initially handheld AR employed fiducial markers , [102] and later GPS units and MEMS sensors such as digital compasses and six degrees of freedom accelerometer– gyroscope . Today simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) markerless trackers such as PTAM (parallel tracking and mapping) are starting to come into use. Handheld display AR promises to be the first commercial success for AR technologies. The two main advantages of handheld AR are the portable nature of handheld devices and the ubiquitous nature of camera phones. The disadvantages are the physical constraints of the user having to hold the handheld device out in front of them at all times, as well as the distorting effect of classically wide-angled mobile phone cameras when compared to the real world as viewed through the eye. [103] Projection mapping[ edit ] Projection mapping augments real-world objects and scenes without the use of special displays such as monitors, head-mounted displays or hand-held devices. Projection mapping makes use of digital projectors to display graphical information onto physical objects. The key difference in projection mapping is that the display is separated from the users of the system. Since the displays are not associated with each user, projection mapping scales naturally up to groups of users, allowing for collocated collaboration between users. Examples include shader lamps , mobile projectors, virtual tables, and smart projectors. Shader lamps mimic and augment reality by projecting imagery onto neutral objects. This provides the opportunity to enhance the object's appearance with materials of a simple unit—a projector, camera, and sensor. Other applications include table and wall projections. Virtual showcases, which employ beam splitter mirrors together with multiple graphics displays, provide an interactive means of simultaneously engaging with the virtual and the real. A projection mapping system can display on any number of surfaces in an indoor setting at once. Projection mapping supports both a graphical visualization and passive haptic sensation for the end users. Users are able to touch physical objects in a process that provides passive haptic sensation. [18] [44] [104] [105] Main article: VR positional tracking Modern mobile augmented-reality systems use one or more of the following motion tracking technologies: digital cameras and/or other optical sensors , accelerometers, GPS, gyroscopes, solid state compasses, radio-frequency identification (RFID). These technologies offer varying levels of accuracy and precision. These technologies are implemented in the ARKit API by Apple and ARCore API by Google to allow tracking for their respective mobile device platforms. Input devices[ edit ] Techniques include speech recognition systems that translate a user's spoken words into computer instructions, and gesture recognition systems that interpret a user's body movements by visual detection or from sensors embedded in a peripheral device such as a wand, stylus, pointer, glove or other body wear. [106] [107] [108] [109] Products which are trying to serve as a controller of AR headsets include Wave by Seebright Inc. and Nimble by Intugine Technologies. Computer[ edit ] Computers are responsible for graphics in augmented reality. A computer analyzes the sensed visual and other data to synthesize and position virtual objects. With the improvement of technology and computers, augmented reality is going to lead to a drastic change on ones perspective of the real world. [110] Computers are improving at a very fast rate, leading to new ways to improve other technology. The more that computers progress, augmented reality will become more flexible and more common in society. Computers are the core of augmented reality. [111] The computer receives data from the sensors which determine the relative position of an objects' surface. This translates to an input to the computer which then outputs to the users by adding something that would otherwise not be there. The computer comprises memory and a processor. [112] The computer takes the scanned environment then generates images or a video and puts it on the receiver for the observer to see. The fixed marks on an object's surface are stored in the memory of a computer. The computer also withdraws from its memory to present images realistically to the onlooker. Projector[ edit ] Projectors can also be used to display AR contents. The projector can throw a virtual object on a projection screen and the viewer can interact with this virtual object. Projection surfaces can be many objects such as walls or glass panes. [113] Networking[ edit ] Mobile augmented reality applications are gaining popularity because of the wide adoption of mobile and especially wearable devices. However, they often rely on computationally intensive computer vision algorithms with extreme latency requirements. To compensate for the lack of computing power, offloading data processing to a distant machine is often desired. Computation offloading introduces new constraints in applications, especially in terms of latency and bandwidth. Although there are a plethora of real-time multimedia transport protocols, there is a need for support from network infrastructure as well. [114] Software and algorithms[ edit ] Comparison of augmented reality fiducial markers for computer vision A key measure of AR systems is how realistically they integrate augmentations with the real world. The software must derive real world coordinates, independent of camera, and camera images. That process is called image registration , and uses different methods of computer vision , mostly related to video tracking . [115] [116] Many computer vision methods of augmented reality are inherited from visual odometry . Usually those methods consist of two parts. The first stage is to detect interest points , fiducial markers or optical flow in the camera images. This step can use feature detection methods like corner detection , blob detection , edge detection or thresholding , and other image processing methods. [117] [118] The second stage restores a real world coordinate system from the data obtained in the first stage. Some methods assume objects with known geometry (or fiducial markers) are present in the scene. In some of those cases the scene 3D structure should be calculated beforehand. If part of the scene is unknown simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) can map relative positions. If no information about scene geometry is available, structure from motion methods like bundle adjustment are used. Mathematical methods used in the second stage include: projective ( epipolar ) geometry, geometric algebra , rotation representation with exponential map , kalman and particle filters, nonlinear optimization , robust statistics .[ citation needed ] In augmented reality, the distinction is made between two distinct modes of tracking, known as marker and markerless . Markers are visual cues which trigger the display of the virtual information. [119] A piece of paper with some distinct geometries can be used. The camera recognizes the geometries by identifying specific points in the drawing. Markerless tracking, also called instant tracking, does not use markers. Instead, the user positions the object in the camera view preferably in a horizontal plane. It uses sensors in mobile devices to accurately detect the real-world environment, such as the locations of walls and points of intersection. [120] Augmented Reality Markup Language (ARML) is a data standard developed within the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), [121] which consists of Extensible Markup Language ( XML ) grammar to describe the location and appearance of virtual objects in the scene, as well as ECMAScript bindings to allow dynamic access to properties of virtual objects. To enable rapid development of augmented reality applications, software development applications have emerged, including Lens Studio from Snapchat and Spark AR from Facebook . Augmented reality Software Development Kits (SDKs) have been launched by Apple and Google. [122] [123] Development[ edit ] The implementation of augmented reality in consumer products requires considering the design of the applications and the related constraints of the technology platform. Since AR systems rely heavily on the immersion of the user and the interaction between the user and the system, design can facilitate the adoption of virtuality. For most augmented reality systems, a similar design guideline can be followed. The following lists some considerations for designing augmented reality applications: Environmental/context design[ edit ] Context Design focuses on the end-user's physical surrounding, spatial space, and accessibility that may play a role when using the AR system. Designers should be aware of the possible physical scenarios the end-user may be in such as: Public, in which the users use their whole body to interact with the software Personal, in which the user uses a smartphone in a public space Intimate, in which the user is sitting with a desktop and is not really moving Private, in which the user has on a wearable. [124] By evaluating each physical scenario, potential safety hazards can be avoided and changes can be made to greater improve the end-user's immersion. UX designers will have to define user journeys for the relevant physical scenarios and define how the interface reacts to each. Another aspect of context design involves the design of the system's functionality and its ability to accommodate user preferences. [125] [126] While accessibility tools are common in basic application design, some consideration should be made when designing time-limited prompts (to prevent unintentional operations), audio cues and overall engagement time. It is important to note that in some situations, the application's functionality may hinder the user's ability. For example, applications that is used for driving should reduce the amount of user interaction and use audio cues instead. Interaction design[ edit ] Interaction design in augmented reality technology centers on the user's engagement with the end product to improve the overall user experience and enjoyment. The purpose of interaction design is to avoid alienating or confusing the user by organizing the information presented. Since user interaction relies on the user's input, designers must make system controls easier to understand and accessible. A common technique to improve usability for augmented reality applications is by discovering the frequently accessed areas in the device's touch display and design the application to match those areas of control. [127] It is also important to structure the user journey maps and the flow of information presented which reduce the system's overall cognitive load and greatly improves the learning curve of the application. [128] In interaction design, it is important for developers to utilize augmented reality technology that complement the system's function or purpose. [129] For instance, the utilization of exciting AR filters and the design of the unique sharing platform in Snapchat enables users to augment their in-app social interactions. In other applications that require users to understand the focus and intent, designers can employ a reticle or raycast from the device. [125] Visual design[ edit ] In general, graphic design is the appearance of the developing application that engages the user. To improve the graphic interface elements and user interaction, developers may use visual cues to inform the user what elements of UI are designed to interact with and how to interact with them. Since navigating in an AR application may appear difficult and seem frustrating, visual cue design can make interactions seem more natural. [124] In some augmented reality applications that use a 2D device as an interactive surface, the 2D control environment does not translate well in 3D space making users hesitant to explore their surroundings. To solve this issue, designers should apply visual cues to assist and encourage users to explore their surroundings. It is important to note the two main objects in AR when developing VR applications: 3D volumetric objects that are manipulated and realistically interact with light and shadow; and animated media imagery such as images and videos which are mostly traditional 2D media rendered in a new context for augmented reality. [124] When virtual objects are projected onto a real environment, it is challenging for augmented reality application designers to ensure a perfectly seamless integration relative to the real-world environment, especially with 2D objects. As such, designers can add weight to objects, use depths maps, and choose different material properties that highlight the object's presence in the real world. Another visual design that can be applied is using different lighting techniques or casting shadows to improve overall depth judgment. For instance, a common lighting technique is simply placing a light source overhead at the 12 o’clock position, to create shadows on virtual objects. [124] Uses[ edit ] Augmented reality has been explored for many uses, from gaming and entertainment to medicine, education and business. [130] Example application areas described below include archaeology, architecture, commerce and education. Some of the earliest cited examples include augmented reality used to support surgery by providing virtual overlays to guide medical practitioners, to AR content for astronomy and welding. [8] [131] Archaeology[ edit ] AR has been used to aid archaeological research. By augmenting archaeological features onto the modern landscape, AR allows archaeologists to formulate possible site configurations from extant structures. [132] Computer generated models of ruins, buildings, landscapes or even ancient people have been recycled into early archaeological AR applications. [133] [134] [135] For example, implementing a system like VITA (Visual Interaction Tool for Archaeology) will allow users to imagine and investigate instant excavation results without leaving their home. Each user can collaborate by mutually "navigating, searching, and viewing data". Hrvoje Benko, a researcher in the computer science department at Columbia University , points out that these particular systems and others like them can provide "3D panoramic images and 3D models of the site itself at different excavation stages" all the while organizing much of the data in a collaborative way that is easy to use. Collaborative AR systems supply multimodal interactions that combine the real world with virtual images of both environments. [136] Architecture[ edit ] AR can aid in visualizing building projects. Computer-generated images of a structure can be superimposed onto a real-life local view of a property before the physical building is constructed there; this was demonstrated publicly by Trimble Navigation in 2004. AR can also be employed within an architect's workspace, rendering animated 3D visualizations of their 2D drawings. Architecture sight-seeing can be enhanced with AR applications, allowing users viewing a building's exterior to virtually see through its walls, viewing its interior objects and layout. [137] [138] [52] With continual improvements to GPS accuracy, businesses are able to use augmented reality to visualize georeferenced models of construction sites, underground structures, cables and pipes using mobile devices. [139] Augmented reality is applied to present new projects, to solve on-site construction challenges, and to enhance promotional materials. [140] Examples include the Daqri Smart Helmet, an Android-powered hard hat used to create augmented reality for the industrial worker, including visual instructions, real-time alerts, and 3D mapping. Following the Christchurch earthquake , the University of Canterbury released CityViewAR, [141] which enabled city planners and engineers to visualize buildings that had been destroyed. [142] This not only provided planners with tools to reference the previous cityscape , but it also served as a reminder of the magnitude of the resulting devastation, as entire buildings had been demolished. Education and Training[ edit ] In educational settings, AR has been used to complement a standard curriculum. Text, graphics, video, and audio may be superimposed into a student's real-time environment. Textbooks, flashcards and other educational reading material may contain embedded "markers" or triggers that, when scanned by an AR device, produced supplementary information to the student rendered in a multimedia format. [143] [144] [145] The 2015 Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality: 7th International Conference mentioned Google Glass as an example of augmented reality that can replace the physical classroom. [146] First, AR technologies help learners engage in authentic exploration in the real world, and virtual objects such as texts, videos, and pictures are supplementary elements for learners to conduct investigations of the real-world surroundings. [147] As AR evolves, students can participate interactively and interact with knowledge more authentically. Instead of remaining passive recipients, students can become active learners, able to interact with their learning environment. Computer-generated simulations of historical events allow students to explore and learning details of each significant area of the event site. [148] In higher education, Construct3D, a Studierstube system, allows students to learn mechanical engineering concepts, math or geometry. [149] Chemistry AR apps allow students to visualize and interact with the spatial structure of a molecule using a marker object held in the hand. [150] Others have used HP Reveal, a free app, to create AR notecards for studying organic chemistry mechanisms or to create virtual demonstrations of how to use laboratory instrumentation. [151] Anatomy students can visualize different systems of the human body in three dimensions. [152] Using AR as a tool to learn anatomical structures has been shown to increase the learner knowledge and provide intrinsic benefits, such as increased engagement and learner immersion. [153] [154] AR has been used to develop different safety training application for several types of disasters such as, earthquakes and building fire. [155] [156] Further, several AR solutions have been proposed and tested to navigate building evacuees towards safe places in both large scale and small scale disasters. [157] [158] Further, AR applications can have several overlapping with many other digital technologies, such as BIM , internet of things and artificial intelligence , to generate smarter safety training and navigation solutions. [159] Industrial manufacturing[ edit ] AR is used to substitute paper manuals with digital instructions which are overlaid on the manufacturing operator's field of view, reducing mental effort required to operate. [160] AR makes machine maintenance efficient because it gives operators direct access to a machine's maintenance history. [161] Virtual manuals help manufacturers adapt to rapidly-changing product designs, as digital instructions are more easily edited and distributed compared to physical manuals. [160] Digital instructions increase operator safety by removing the need for operators to look at a screen or manual away from the working area, which can be hazardous. Instead, the instructions are overlaid on the working area. [162] [163] The use of AR can increase operators' feeling of safety when working near high-load industrial machinery by giving operators additional information on a machine's status and safety functions, as well as hazardous areas of the workspace. [162] [164] Main article: Commercial augmented reality The AR-Icon can be used as a marker on print as well as on online media. It signals the viewer that digital content is behind it. The content can be viewed with a smartphone or tablet. AR is used to integrate print and video marketing. Printed marketing material can be designed with certain "trigger" images that, when scanned by an AR-enabled device using image recognition, activate a video version of the promotional material. A major difference between augmented reality and straightforward image recognition is that one can overlay multiple media at the same time in the view screen, such as social media share buttons, the in-page video even audio and 3D objects. Traditional print-only publications are using augmented reality to connect different types of media. [165] [166] [167] [168] [169] AR can enhance product previews such as allowing a customer to view what's inside a product's packaging without opening it. [170] AR can also be used as an aid in selecting products from a catalog or through a kiosk. Scanned images of products can activate views of additional content such as customization options and additional images of the product in its use. [171] By 2010, virtual dressing rooms had been developed for e-commerce. [172] In 2012, a mint used AR techniques to market a commemorative coin for Aruba. The coin itself was used as an AR trigger, and when held in front of an AR-enabled device it revealed additional objects and layers of information that were not visible without the device. [173] [174] In 2018, Apple announced Universal Scene Description (USDZ) AR file support for iPhones and iPads with iOS 12. Apple has created an AR QuickLook Gallery that allows masses to experience augmented reality on their own Apple device. [175] In 2018, Shopify , the Canadian e-commerce company, announced AR Quick Look integration. Their merchants will be able to upload 3D models of their products and their users will be able to tap on the models inside the Safari browser on their iOS devices to view them in their real-world environments. [176] In 2018, Twinkl released a free AR classroom application. Pupils can see how York looked over 1,900 years ago. [177] Twinkl launched the first ever multi-player AR game, Little Red [178] and has over 100 free AR educational models. [179] Augmented reality is becoming more frequently used for online advertising. Retailers offer the ability to upload a picture on their website and "try on" various clothes which are overlaid on the picture. Even further, companies such as Bodymetrics install dressing booths in department stores that offer full-body scanning . These booths render a 3-D model of the user, allowing the consumers to view different outfits on themselves without the need of physically changing clothes. [180] For example, JC Penney and Bloomingdale's use " virtual dressing rooms " that allow customers to see themselves in clothes without trying them on. [181] Another store that uses AR to market clothing to its customers is Neiman Marcus . [182] Neiman Marcus offers consumers the ability to see their outfits in a 360-degree view with their "memory mirror". [182] Makeup stores like L'Oreal , Sephora , Charlotte Tilbury , and Rimmel also have apps that utilize AR. [183] These apps allow consumers to see how the makeup will look on them. [183] According to Greg Jones, director of AR and VR at Google, augmented reality is going to "reconnect physical and digital retail". [183] AR technology is also used by furniture retailers such as IKEA , Houzz , and Wayfair . [183] [181] These retailers offer apps that allow consumers to view their products in their home prior to purchasing anything. [183] In 2017, Ikea announced the Ikea Place app. It contains a catalogue of over 2,000 products—nearly the company's full collection of sofas, armchairs, coffee tables, and storage units which one can place anywhere in a room with their phone. [184] The app made it possible to have 3D and true-to-scale models of furniture in the customer's living space. IKEA realized that their customers are not shopping in stores as often or making direct purchases anymore. [185] [186] Shopify's acquisition of Primer, an AR app aims to push small and medium-sized sellers towards interactive AR shopping with easy to use AR integration and user experience for both merchants and consumers. [187] AR helps the retail industry reduce operating costs. Merchants upload product information to the AR system, and consumers can use mobile terminals to search and generate 3D maps. [188] Literature[ edit ] An example of an AR code containing a QR code The first description of AR as it is known today was in Virtual Light , the 1994 novel by William Gibson. In 2011, AR was blended with poetry by ni ka from Sekai Camera in Tokyo, Japan. The prose of these AR poems come from Paul Celan , Die Niemandsrose , expressing the aftermath of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami . [189] Visual art[ edit ] 10.000 Moving Cities, Marc Lee , Augmented Reality Multiplayer Game, Art Installation [190] AR applied in the visual arts allows objects or places to trigger artistic multidimensional experiences and interpretations of reality. The Australian new media artist Jeffrey Shaw pioneered Augmented Reality in three artworks: Viewpoint in 1975, Virtual Sculptures in 1987 and The Golden Calf in 1993. [191] [192] He continues to explore new permutations of AR in numerous recent works. Augmented reality can aid in the progression of visual art in museums by allowing museum visitors to view artwork in galleries in a multidimensional way through their phone screens. [193] The Museum of Modern Art in New York has created an exhibit in their art museum showcasing AR features that viewers can see using an app on their smartphone. [194] The museum has developed their personal app, called MoMAR Gallery, that museum guests can download and use in the augmented reality specialized gallery in order to view the museum's paintings in a different way. [195] This allows individuals to see hidden aspects and information about the paintings, and to be able to have an interactive technological experience with artwork as well. AR technology was used in Nancy Baker Cahill's "Margin of Error" and "Revolutions," [196] the two public art pieces she created for the 2019 Desert X exhibition. [197] AR technology aided the development of eye tracking technology to translate a disabled person's eye movements into drawings on a screen. [198] A Danish artist, Olafur Eliasson , has placed objects like burning suns, extraterrestrial rocks, and rare animals, into the user's environment. [199] Martin & Muñoz started using Augmented Reality (AR) technology in 2020 to create and place virtual works, based on their snow globes, in their exhibitions and in user's environments. Their first AR work was presented at the Cervantes Institute in New York in early 2022. [200] Further information on the 2004 augmented reality outdoor art project: LifeClipper Fitness[ edit ] AR hardware and software for use in fitness includes smart glasses made for biking and running, with performance analytics and map navigation projected onto the user's field of vision, [201] and boxing, martial arts, and tennis, where users remain aware of their physical environment for safety. [202] Fitness-related games and software include Pokémon Go and Jurassic World Alive . [203] Human–computer interaction[ edit ] Human–computer interaction (HCI) is an interdisciplinary area of computing that deals with design and implementation of systems that interact with people. Researchers in HCI come from a number of disciplines, including computer science, engineering, design, human factor, and social science, with a shared goal to solve problems in the design and the use of technology so that it can be used more easily, effectively, efficiently, safely, and with satisfaction. [204] According to a 2017 Time article, in about 15 to 20 years it is predicted that augmented reality and virtual reality are going to become the primary use for computer interactions. [205] Remote collaboration[ edit ] Primary school children learn easily from interactive experiences. As an example, astronomical constellations and the movements of objects in the solar system were oriented in 3D and overlaid in the direction the device was held, and expanded with supplemental video information. Paper-based science book illustrations could seem to come alive as video without requiring the child to navigate to web-based materials. In 2013, a project was launched on Kickstarter to teach about electronics with an educational toy that allowed children to scan their circuit with an iPad and see the electric current flowing around. [206] While some educational apps were available for AR by 2016, it was not broadly used. Apps that leverage augmented reality to aid learning included SkyView for studying astronomy, [207] AR Circuits for building simple electric circuits, [208] and SketchAr for drawing. [209] AR would also be a way for parents and teachers to achieve their goals for modern education, which might include providing more individualized and flexible learning, making closer connections between what is taught at school and the real world, and helping students to become more engaged in their own learning. Emergency management/search and rescue[ edit ] Augmented reality systems are used in public safety situations, from super storms to suspects at large. As early as 2009, two articles from Emergency Management discussed AR technology for emergency management. The first was "Augmented Reality—Emerging Technology for Emergency Management", by Gerald Baron. [210] According to Adam Crow,: "Technologies like augmented reality (ex: Google Glass) and the growing expectation of the public will continue to force professional emergency managers to radically shift when, where, and how technology is deployed before, during, and after disasters." [211] Another early example was a search aircraft looking for a lost hiker in rugged mountain terrain. Augmented reality systems provided aerial camera operators with a geographic awareness of forest road names and locations blended with the camera video. The camera operator was better able to search for the hiker knowing the geographic context of the camera image. Once located, the operator could more efficiently direct rescuers to the hiker's location because the geographic position and reference landmarks were clearly labeled. [212] Social interaction[ edit ] AR can be used to facilitate social interaction. An augmented reality social network framework called Talk2Me enables people to disseminate information and view others' advertised information in an augmented reality way. The timely and dynamic information sharing and viewing functionalities of Talk2Me help initiate conversations and make friends for users with people in physical proximity. [213] However, use of an AR headset can inhibit the quality of an interaction between two people if one isn't wearing one if the headset becomes a distraction. [214] Augmented reality also gives users the ability to practice different forms of social interactions with other people in a safe, risk-free environment. Hannes Kauffman, Associate Professor for virtual reality at TU Vienna , says: "In collaborative augmented reality multiple users may access a shared space populated by virtual objects, while remaining grounded in the real world. This technique is particularly powerful for educational purposes when users are collocated and can use natural means of communication (speech, gestures, etc.), but can also be mixed successfully with immersive VR or remote collaboration."[ This quote needs a citation ] Hannes cites education as a potential use of this technology. "Augmented reality game" redirects here. Not to be confused with alternate reality game . "AR games" redirects here. For the Nintendo 3DS game, see AR Games . See also: List of augmented reality video games An AR mobile game using a trigger image as fiducial marker The gaming industry embraced AR technology. A number of games were developed for prepared indoor environments, such as AR air hockey, Titans of Space, collaborative combat against virtual enemies, and AR-enhanced pool table games. [215] [216] [217] In 2010, Ogmento became the first AR gaming startup to receive VC Funding.  The company went on to produce early location-based AR games for titles like Paranormal Activity: Sanctuary, NBA: King of the Court, and Halo: King of the Hill. The companies computer vision technology was eventually repackaged and sold to Apple, became a major contribution to ARKit. [218] Augmented reality allows video game players to experience digital game play in a real-world environment. Niantic released the augmented reality mobile game Pokémon Go. [219] Disney has partnered with Lenovo to create the augmented reality game Star Wars : Jedi Challenges that works with a Lenovo Mirage AR headset, a tracking sensor and a Lightsaber controller, scheduled to launch in December 2017. [220] Main article: Industrial augmented reality AR allows industrial designers to experience a product's design and operation before completion. Volkswagen has used AR for comparing calculated and actual crash test imagery. [221] AR has been used to visualize and modify car body structure and engine layout. It has also been used to compare digital mock-ups with physical mock-ups to find discrepancies between them. [222] [223] Healthcare planning, practice and education[ edit ] One of the first applications of augmented reality was in healthcare, particularly to support the planning, practice, and training of surgical procedures. As far back as 1992, enhancing human performance during surgery was a formally stated objective when building the first augmented reality systems at U.S. Air Force laboratories. [3] Since 2005, a device called a near-infrared vein finder that films subcutaneous veins, processes and projects the image of the veins onto the skin has been used to locate veins. [224] [225] AR provides surgeons with patient monitoring data in the style of a fighter pilot's heads-up display, and allows patient imaging records, including functional videos, to be accessed and overlaid. Examples include a virtual X-ray view based on prior tomography or on real-time images from ultrasound and confocal microscopy probes, [226] visualizing the position of a tumor in the video of an endoscope , [227] or radiation exposure risks from X-ray imaging devices. [228] [229] AR can enhance viewing a fetus inside a mother's womb . [230] Siemens, Karl Storz and IRCAD have developed a system for laparoscopic liver surgery that uses AR to view sub-surface tumors and vessels. [231] AR has been used for cockroach phobia treatment [232] and to reduce the fear of spiders. [233] Patients wearing augmented reality glasses can be reminded to take medications. [234] Augmented reality can be very helpful in the medical field. [235] It could be used to provide crucial information to a doctor or surgeon without having them take their eyes off the patient. On 30 April 2015 Microsoft announced the Microsoft HoloLens , their first attempt at augmented reality. The HoloLens has advanced through the years and is capable of projecting holograms for near infrared fluorescence based image guided surgery. [236] As augmented reality advances, it finds increasing applications in healthcare. Augmented reality and similar computer based-utilities are being used to train medical professionals. [237] [238] In healthcare, AR can be used to provide guidance during diagnostic and therapeutic interventions e.g. during surgery. Magee et al., [239] for instance, describe the use of augmented reality for medical training in simulating ultrasound-guided needle placement. A very recent study by Akçayır, Akçayır, Pektaş, and Ocak (2016) revealed that AR technology both improves university students' laboratory skills and helps them to build positive attitudes relating to physics laboratory work. [240] Recently, augmented reality began seeing adoption in neurosurgery , a field that requires heavy amounts of imaging before procedures. [241] Spatial immersion and interaction[ edit ] Augmented reality applications, running on handheld devices utilized as virtual reality headsets, can also digitize human presence in space and provide a computer generated model of them, in a virtual space where they can interact and perform various actions. Such capabilities are demonstrated by Project Anywhere, developed by a postgraduate student at ETH Zurich, which was dubbed as an "out-of-body experience". [242] [243] [244] Flight training[ edit ] Building on decades of perceptual-motor research in experimental psychology, researchers at the Aviation Research Laboratory of the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign used augmented reality in the form of a flight path in the sky to teach flight students how to land an airplane using a flight simulator. An adaptive augmented schedule in which students were shown the augmentation only when they departed from the flight path proved to be a more effective training intervention than a constant schedule. [30] [245] Flight students taught to land in the simulator with the adaptive augmentation learned to land a light aircraft more quickly than students with the same amount of landing training in the simulator but with constant augmentation or without any augmentation. [30] Military[ edit ] Augmented reality system for soldier ARC4 (U.S. Army 2017) An interesting early application of AR occurred when Rockwell International created video map overlays of satellite and orbital debris tracks to aid in space observations at Air Force Maui Optical System. In their 1993 paper "Debris Correlation Using the Rockwell WorldView System" the authors describe the use of map overlays applied to video from space surveillance telescopes. The map overlays indicated the trajectories of various objects in geographic coordinates. This allowed telescope operators to identify satellites, and also to identify and catalog potentially dangerous space debris. [40] Starting in 2003 the US Army integrated the SmartCam3D augmented reality system into the Shadow Unmanned Aerial System to aid sensor operators using telescopic cameras to locate people or points of interest. The system combined fixed geographic information including street names, points of interest, airports, and railroads with live video from the camera system. The system offered a "picture in picture" mode that allows it to show a synthetic view of the area surrounding the camera's field of view. This helps solve a problem in which the field of view is so narrow that it excludes important context, as if "looking through a soda straw". The system displays real-time friend/foe/neutral location markers blended with live video, providing the operator with improved situational awareness. Researchers at USAF Research Lab (Calhoun, Draper et al.) found an approximately two-fold increase in the speed at which UAV sensor operators found points of interest using this technology. [246] This ability to maintain geographic awareness quantitatively enhances mission efficiency. The system is in use on the US Army RQ-7 Shadow and the MQ-1C Gray Eagle Unmanned Aerial Systems. Circular review system of the company LimpidArmor In combat, AR can serve as a networked communication system that renders useful battlefield data onto a soldier's goggles in real time. From the soldier's viewpoint, people and various objects can be marked with special indicators to warn of potential dangers. Virtual maps and 360° view camera imaging can also be rendered to aid a soldier's navigation and battlefield perspective, and this can be transmitted to military leaders at a remote command center. [247] The combination of 360° view cameras visualization and AR can be used on board combat vehicles and tanks as circular review system . AR can be an effective tool for virtually mapping out the 3D topologies of munition storages in the terrain, with the choice of the munitions combination in stacks and distances between them with a visualization of risk areas. [248] [ unreliable source? ] The scope of AR applications also includes visualization of data from embedded munitions monitoring sensors. [248] See also: Automotive navigation system LandForm video map overlay marking runways, road, and buildings during 1999 helicopter flight test The NASA X-38 was flown using a hybrid synthetic vision system that overlaid map data on video to provide enhanced navigation for the spacecraft during flight tests from 1998 to 2002. It used the LandForm software which was useful for times of limited visibility, including an instance when the video camera window frosted over leaving astronauts to rely on the map overlays. [45] The LandForm software was also test flown at the Army Yuma Proving Ground in 1999. In the photo at right one can see the map markers indicating runways, air traffic control tower, taxiways, and hangars overlaid on the video. [46] AR can augment the effectiveness of navigation devices. Information can be displayed on an automobile's windshield indicating destination directions and meter, weather, terrain, road conditions and traffic information as well as alerts to potential hazards in their path. [249] [250] [251] Since 2012, a Swiss-based company WayRay has been developing holographic AR navigation systems that use holographic optical elements for projecting all route-related information including directions, important notifications, and points of interest right into the drivers' line of sight and far ahead of the vehicle. [252] [253] Aboard maritime vessels, AR can allow bridge watch-standers to continuously monitor important information such as a ship's heading and speed while moving throughout the bridge or performing other tasks. [254] Workplace[ edit ] Augmented reality may have a positive impact on work collaboration as people may be inclined to interact more actively with their learning environment. It may also encourage tacit knowledge renewal which makes firms more competitive. AR was used to facilitate collaboration among distributed team members via conferences with local and virtual participants. AR tasks included brainstorming and discussion meetings utilizing common visualization via touch screen tables, interactive digital whiteboards, shared design spaces and distributed control rooms. [255] [256] [257] In industrial environments, augmented reality is proving to have a substantial impact with more and more use cases emerging across all aspect of the product lifecycle, starting from product design and new product introduction (NPI) to manufacturing to service and maintenance, to material handling and distribution. For example, labels were displayed on parts of a system to clarify operating instructions for a mechanic performing maintenance on a system. [258] [259] Assembly lines benefited from the usage of AR. In addition to Boeing, BMW and Volkswagen were known for incorporating this technology into assembly lines for monitoring process improvements. [260] [261] [262] Big machines are difficult to maintain because of their multiple layers or structures. AR permits people to look through the machine as if with an x-ray, pointing them to the problem right away. [263] As AR technology has evolved and second and third generation AR devices come to market, the impact of AR in enterprise continues to flourish. In the Harvard Business Review, Magid Abraham and Marco Annunziata discuss how AR devices are now being used to "boost workers' productivity on an array of tasks the first time they're used, even without prior training". [264] They contend that "these technologies increase productivity by making workers more skilled and efficient, and thus have the potential to yield both more economic growth and better jobs". [264] Broadcast and live events[ edit ] Weather visualizations were the first application of augmented reality in television. It has now become common in weather casting to display full motion video of images captured in real-time from multiple cameras and other imaging devices. Coupled with 3D graphics symbols and mapped to a common virtual geospatial model, these animated visualizations constitute the first true application of AR to TV. AR has become common in sports telecasting. Sports and entertainment venues are provided with see-through and overlay augmentation through tracked camera feeds for enhanced viewing by the audience. Examples include the yellow " first down " line seen in television broadcasts of American football games showing the line the offensive team must cross to receive a first down. AR is also used in association with football and other sporting events to show commercial advertisements overlaid onto the view of the playing area. Sections of rugby fields and cricket pitches also display sponsored images. Swimming telecasts often add a line across the lanes to indicate the position of the current record holder as a race proceeds to allow viewers to compare the current race to the best performance. Other examples include hockey puck tracking and annotations of racing car performance [265] and snooker ball trajectories. [115] [266] AR has been used to enhance concert and theater performances. For example, artists allow listeners to augment their listening experience by adding their performance to that of other bands/groups of users. [267] [268] [269] Tourism and sightseeing[ edit ] Travelers may use AR to access real-time informational displays regarding a location, its features, and comments or content provided by previous visitors. Advanced AR applications include simulations of historical events, places, and objects rendered into the landscape. [270] [271] [272] AR applications linked to geographic locations present location information by audio, announcing features of interest at a particular site as they become visible to the user. [273] [274] [275] Translation[ edit ] AR systems such as Word Lens can interpret the foreign text on signs and menus and, in a user's augmented view, re-display the text in the user's language. Spoken words of a foreign language can be translated and displayed in a user's view as printed subtitles. [276] [277] [278] It has been suggested that augmented reality may be used in new methods of music production , mixing , control and visualization . [279] [280] [281] [282] In a proof-of-concept project Ian Sterling, an interaction design student at California College of the Arts , and software engineer Swaroop Pal demonstrated a HoloLens app whose primary purpose is to provide a 3D spatial UI for cross-platform devices—the Android Music Player app and Arduino-controlled Fan and Light—and also allow interaction using gaze and gesture control. [283] [284] [285] [286] Research by members of the CRIStAL at the University of Lille makes use of augmented reality to enrich musical performance. The ControllAR project allows musicians to augment their MIDI control surfaces with the remixed graphical user interfaces of music software . [287] The Rouages project proposes to augment digital musical instruments to reveal their mechanisms to the audience and thus improve the perceived liveness. [288] Reflets is a novel augmented reality display dedicated to musical performances where the audience acts as a 3D display by revealing virtual content on stage, which can also be used for 3D musical interaction and collaboration. [289] Snapchat[ edit ] Snapchat users have access to augmented reality in the app through use of camera filters. In September 2017, Snapchat updated its app to include a camera filter that allowed users to render an animated, cartoon version of themselves called " Bitmoji ". These animated avatars would be projected in the real world through the camera, and can be photographed or video recorded. [290] In the same month, Snapchat also announced a new feature called "Sky Filters" that will be available on its app. This new feature makes use of augmented reality to alter the look of a picture taken of the sky, much like how users can apply the app's filters to other pictures. Users can choose from sky filters such as starry night, stormy clouds, beautiful sunsets, and rainbow. [291] Reality modifications[ edit ] In a paper titled "Death by Pokémon GO" , researchers at Purdue University 's Krannert School of Management claim the game caused "a disproportionate increase in vehicular crashes and associated vehicular damage, personal injuries, and fatalities in the vicinity of locations, called PokéStops, where users can play the game while driving." [292] Using data from one municipality, the paper extrapolates what that might mean nationwide and concluded "the increase in crashes attributable to the introduction of Pokémon GO is 145,632 with an associated increase in the number of injuries of 29,370 and an associated increase in the number of fatalities of 256 over the period of 6 July 2016, through 30 November 2016." The authors extrapolated the cost of those crashes and fatalities at between $2bn and $7.3 billion for the same period. Furthermore, more than one in three surveyed advanced Internet users would like to edit out disturbing elements around them, such as garbage or graffiti. [293] They would like to even modify their surroundings by erasing street signs, billboard ads, and uninteresting shopping windows. So it seems that AR is as much a threat to companies as it is an opportunity. Although, this could be a nightmare to numerous brands that do not manage to capture consumer imaginations it also creates the risk that the wearers of augmented reality glasses may become unaware of surrounding dangers. Consumers want to use augmented reality glasses to change their surroundings into something that reflects their own personal opinions. Around two in five want to change the way their surroundings look and even how people appear to them. [ citation needed ] Next, to the possible privacy issues that are described below, overload and over-reliance issues are the biggest danger of AR. For the development of new AR-related products, this implies that the user-interface should follow certain guidelines as not to overload the user with information while also preventing the user from over-relying on the AR system such that important cues from the environment are missed. [18] This is called the virtually-augmented key. [18] Once the key is ignored, people might not desire the real world anymore. Privacy concerns[ edit ] The concept of modern augmented reality depends on the ability of the device to record and analyze the environment in real time. Because of this, there are potential legal concerns over privacy. While the First Amendment to the United States Constitution allows for such recording in the name of public interest, the constant recording of an AR device makes it difficult to do so without also recording outside of the public domain. Legal complications would be found in areas where a right to a certain amount of privacy is expected or where copyrighted media are displayed. In terms of individual privacy, there exists the ease of access to information that one should not readily possess about a given person. This is accomplished through facial recognition technology. Assuming that AR automatically passes information about persons that the user sees, there could be anything seen from social media, criminal record, and marital status. [294] The Code of Ethics on Human Augmentation, which was originally introduced by Steve Mann in 2004 and further refined with Ray Kurzweil and Marvin Minsky in 2013, was ultimately ratified at the virtual reality Toronto conference on 25 June 2017. [295] [296] [297] [298] Property law[ edit ] The interaction of location-bound augmented reality with property law is largely undefined. [299] [300] Several models have been analysed for how this interaction may be resolved in a common law context: an extension of real property rights to also cover augmentations on or near the property with a strong notion of trespassing , forbidding augmentations unless allowed by the owner; an ' open range ' system, where augmentations are allowed unless forbidden by the owner; and a ' freedom to roam ' system, where real property owners have no control over non-disruptive augmentations. [301] One issue experienced during the Pokémon Go craze was the game's players disturbing owners of private property while visiting nearby location-bound augmentations, which may have been on the properties or the properties may have been en route. The terms of service of Pokémon Go explicitly disclaim responsibility for players' actions, which may limit (but may not totally extinguish) the liability of its producer, Niantic , in the event of a player trespassing while playing the game: by Niantic's argument, the player is the one committing the trespass, while Niantic has merely engaged in permissible free speech . A theory advanced in lawsuits brought against Niantic is that their placement of game elements in places that will lead to trespass or an exceptionally large flux of visitors can constitute nuisance , despite each individual trespass or visit only being tenuously caused by Niantic. [302] [303] [304] Another claim raised against Niantic is that the placement of profitable game elements on land without permission of the land's owners is unjust enrichment . [305] More hypothetically, a property may be augmented with advertising or disagreeable content against its owner's wishes. [306] Under American law, these situations are unlikely to be seen as a violation of real property rights by courts without an expansion of those rights to include augmented reality (similarly to how English common law came to recognise air rights ). [305] An article in the Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review argues that there are three bases for this extension, starting with various understanding of property. The personality theory of property, outlined by Margaret Radin , is claimed to support extending property rights due to the intimate connection between personhood and ownership of property; however, her viewpoint is not universally shared by legal theorists. [307] Under the utilitarian theory of property , the benefits from avoiding the harms to real property owners caused by augmentations and the tragedy of the commons , and the reduction in transaction costs by making discovery of ownership easy, were assessed as justifying recognising real property rights as covering location-bound augmentations, though there does remain the possibility of a tragedy of the anticommons from having to negotiate with property owners slowing innovation. [308] Finally, following the 'property as the law of things' identification as supported by Thomas Merrill and Henry E Smith , location-based augmentation is naturally identified as a 'thing', and, while the non-rivalrous and ephemeral nature of digital objects presents difficulties to the excludeability prong of the definition, the article argues that this is not insurmountable. [309] Some attempts at legislative regulation have been made in the United States . Milwaukee County, Wisconsin attempted to regulate augmented reality games played in its parks, requiring prior issuance of a permit, [310] but this was criticised on free speech grounds by a federal judge; [311] and Illinois considered mandating a notice and take down procedure for location-bound augmentations. [312] An article for the Iowa Law Review observed that dealing with many local permitting processes would be arduous for a large-scale service, [313] and, while the proposed Illinois mechanism could be made workable, [314] it was reactive and required property owners to potentially continually deal with new augmented reality services; instead, a national-level geofencing registry, analogous to a do-not-call list , was proposed as the most desirable form of regulation to efficiently balance the interests of both providers of augmented reality services and real property owners. [315] An article in the Vanderbilt Journal of Entertainment and Technology Law , however, analyses a monolithic do-not-locate registry as an insufficiently flexible tool, either permitting unwanted augmentations or foreclosing useful applications of augmented reality. [316] Instead, it argues that an 'open range' model, where augmentations are permitted by default but property owners may restrict them on a case-by-case basis (and with noncompliance treated as a form of trespass), will produce the socially-best outcome. [317] Ivan Sutherland invented the first VR head-mounted display at Harvard University . Steve Mann formulated an earlier concept of mediated reality in the 1970s and 1980s, using cameras, processors, and display systems to modify visual reality to help people see better (dynamic range management), building computerized welding helmets, as well as "augmediated reality" vision systems for use in everyday life. He is also an adviser to Meta . [318] Ronald Azuma is a scientist and author of works on AR. Dieter Schmalstieg and Daniel Wagner developed a marker tracking systems for mobile phones and PDAs in 2009. [319] Jeri Ellsworth headed a research effort for Valve on augmented reality (AR), later taking that research to her own start-up CastAR . The company, founded in 2013, eventually shuttered. Later, she created another start-up based on the same technology called Tilt Five; another AR start-up formed by her with the purpose of creating a device for digital board games . [320]
Toggle the table of contents Cryptocurrency From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Digital currency not reliant on a central authority Not to be confused with Virtual currency . A logo for Bitcoin , the first decentralized cryptocurrency The genesis block of Bitcoin's blockchain , with a note containing The Times newspaper headline. This note has been interpreted as a comment on the instability caused by fractional-reserve banking . [1] : 18 A cryptocurrency, crypto-currency, or crypto [a] is a digital currency designed to work as a medium of exchange through a computer network that is not reliant on any central authority, such as a government or bank , to uphold or maintain it. [2] Individual coin ownership records are stored in a digital ledger , which is a computerized database using strong cryptography to secure transaction records, control the creation of additional coins, and verify the transfer of coin ownership. [3] [4] [5] Despite the term that has come to describe many of the fungible blockchain tokens that have been created, cryptocurrencies are not considered to be currencies in the traditional sense, and varying legal treatments have been applied to them in various jurisdicitons, including classification as commodities , securities , and currencies, cryptocurrencies are generally viewed as a distinct asset class in practice. [6] [7] [8] Some crypto schemes use validators to maintain the cryptocurrency. In a proof-of-stake model, owners put up their tokens as collateral. In return, they get authority over the token in proportion to the amount they stake. Generally, these token stakers get additional ownership in the token over time via network fees, newly minted tokens, or other such reward mechanisms. [9] Cryptocurrency does not exist in physical form (like paper money) and is typically not issued by a central authority. Cryptocurrencies typically use decentralized control as opposed to a central bank digital currency (CBDC). [10] When a cryptocurrency is minted, created prior to issuance, or issued by a single issuer, it is generally considered centralized. When implemented with decentralized control, each cryptocurrency works through distributed ledger technology, typically a blockchain , that serves as a public financial transaction database. [11] The first cryptocurrency was Bitcoin , which was first released as open-source software in 2009. As of June 2023, there were more than 25,000 other cryptocurrencies in the marketplace, of which more than 40 had a market capitalization exceeding $1 billion. [12] Throughout their existence, cryptocurrencies have been involved in criminal activities and multi-billion-dollar fraud schemes . Some economists and investors, such as Warren Buffett , considered cryptocurrencies to be a speculative bubble . History See also: History of bitcoin In 1983, American cryptographer David Chaum conceived of a type of cryptographic electronic money called ecash . [13] [14] Later, in 1995, he implemented it through Digicash , [15] an early form of cryptographic electronic payments. Digicash required user software in order to withdraw notes from a bank and designate specific encrypted keys before it can be sent to a recipient. This allowed the digital currency to be untraceable by a third party. In 1996, the National Security Agency published a paper entitled How to Make a Mint: The Cryptography of Anonymous Electronic Cash, describing a cryptocurrency system. The paper was first published in an MIT mailing list [16] and later in 1997 in The American Law Review. [17] In 1998, Wei Dai described "b-money", an anonymous, distributed electronic cash system. [18] Shortly thereafter, Nick Szabo described bit gold . [19] Like Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies that would follow it, bit gold (not to be confused with the later gold-based exchange BitGold) was described as an electronic currency system which required users to complete a proof of work function with solutions being cryptographically put together and published. In January 2009, Bitcoin was created by pseudonymous developer Satoshi Nakamoto . It used SHA-256 , a cryptographic hash function, in its proof-of-work scheme. [20] [21] In April 2011, Namecoin was created as an attempt at forming a decentralized DNS . In October 2011, Litecoin was released which used scrypt as its hash function instead of SHA-256. Peercoin , created in August 2012, used a hybrid of proof-of-work and proof-of-stake . [22] See also: Cryptocurrency bubble § History Cryptocurrency has undergone several periods of growth and retraction, including several bubbles and market crashes, such as in 2011, 2013–2014/15, 2017–2018 and 2021–2023. [23] [24] On 6 August 2014, the UK announced its Treasury had commissioned a study of cryptocurrencies, and what role, if any, they could play in the UK economy. The study was also to report on whether regulation should be considered. [25] Its final report was published in 2018, [26] and it issued a consultation on cryptoassets and stablecoins in January 2021. [27] In June 2021, El Salvador became the first country to accept Bitcoin as legal tender , after the Legislative Assembly had voted 62–22 to pass a bill submitted by President Nayib Bukele classifying the cryptocurrency as such. [28] In August 2021, Cuba followed with Resolution 215 to recognize and regulate cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin. [29] In September 2021, the government of China , the single largest market for cryptocurrency, declared all cryptocurrency transactions illegal. This completed a crackdown on cryptocurrency that had previously banned the operation of intermediaries and miners within China. [30] On 15 September 2022, the world's second largest cryptocurrency at that time, Ethereum transitioned its consensus mechanism from proof-of-work (PoW) to proof-of-stake (PoS) in an upgrade process known as "the Merge".  According to the Ethereum Founder, the upgrade can cut both Ethereum's energy use and carbon-dioxide emissions by 99.9%. [31] On 11 November 2022, FTX Trading Ltd. , a cryptocurrency exchange , which also operated a crypto hedge fund , and had been valued at $18 billion, [32] filed for bankruptcy . [33] The financial impact of the collapse extended beyond the immediate FTX customer base, as reported, [34] while, at a Reuters conference, financial industry executives said that "regulators must step in to protect crypto investors." [35] Technology analyst Avivah Litan commented on the cryptocurrency ecosystem that "everything...needs to improve dramatically in terms of user experience, controls, safety, customer service." [36] Formal definition According to Jan Lansky, a cryptocurrency is a system that meets six conditions: [37] The system does not require a central authority; its state is maintained through distributed consensus. The system keeps an overview of cryptocurrency units and their ownership. The system defines whether new cryptocurrency units can be created. If new cryptocurrency units can be created, the system defines the circumstances of their origin and how to determine the ownership of these new units. Ownership of cryptocurrency units can be proved exclusively cryptographically. The system allows transactions to be performed in which ownership of the cryptographic units is changed. A transaction statement can only be issued by an entity proving the current ownership of these units. If two different instructions for changing the ownership of the same cryptographic units are simultaneously entered, the system performs at most one of them. In March 2018, the word cryptocurrency was added to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary . [38] Altcoins Further information: List of cryptocurrencies After the early innovation of Bitcoin in 2008, and the early network effect gained by Bitcoin, tokens, cryptocurrencies, and other digital assets that were not Bitcoin became collectively known during the 2010s as alternative cryptocurrencies, [39] [40] [41] or "altcoins." [42] Sometimes the term "alt coins" was used, [43] [44] or disparagingly, "shitcoins". [45] Paul Vigna of The Wall Street Journal described altcoins in 2020 as "alternative versions of Bitcoin" [46] given its role as the model protocol for cryptocurrency designers.  A Polytechnic University of Catalonia thesis in 2021 used a somewhat broader description. Not just as alternative versions of Bitcoin itself, but for any cryptocurrency other than bitcoin. "As of early 2020, there were more than 5,000 cryptocurrencies. Altcoin is the combination of two words "alt" and "coin" and includes all alternatives to Bitcoin." [42] : 14 The logo of Ethereum, the second largest cryptocurrency Altcoins often have underlying differences when compared to Bitcoin. For example, Litecoin aims to process a block every 2.5 minutes, rather than Bitcoin's 10 minutes, which allows Litecoin to confirm transactions faster than Bitcoin. [47] Another example is Ethereum , which has smart contract functionality that allows decentralized applications to be run on its blockchain. [48] Ethereum was the most used blockchain in 2020, according to Bloomberg News. [49] In 2016, it had the largest "following" of any altcoin, according to the New York Times. [50] Significant market price rallies across multiple altcoin markets are often referred to as an "altseason". [51] [52] Stablecoins Stablecoins are cryptocurrencies designed to maintain a stable level of purchasing power . [53] Notably, these designs are not foolproof, as a number of stablecoins have crashed or lost their peg . For example, on 11 May 2022, Terra 's stablecoin UST fell from $1 to 26 cents. [54] [55] The subsequent failure of Terraform Labs resulted in the loss of nearly $40B invested in the Terra and Luna coins. [56] In September 2022, South Korean prosecutors requested the issuance of an Interpol Red Notice against the company's founder, Do Kwon . [57] In Hong Kong, the expected regulatory framework for stablecoins in 2023/24 is being shaped and includes a few considerations. [58] Architecture This section duplicates the scope of other articles, specifically Blockchain . Please discuss this issue and help introduce a summary style to the section by replacing the section with a link and a summary or by splitting the content into a new article. (August 2022) Cryptocurrency is produced by an entire cryptocurrency system collectively, at a rate which is defined when the system is created and which is publicly stated. In centralized banking and economic systems such as the US Federal Reserve System , corporate boards or governments control the supply of currency.[ citation needed ] In the case of cryptocurrency, companies or governments cannot produce new units, and have not so far provided backing for other firms, banks or corporate entities which hold asset value measured in it. The underlying technical system upon which cryptocurrencies are based was created by Satoshi Nakamoto . [59] Within a proof-of-work system such as Bitcoin, the safety, integrity and balance of ledgers is maintained by a community of mutually distrustful parties referred to as miners . Miners use their computers to help validate and timestamp transactions, adding them to the ledger in accordance with a particular timestamping scheme. [20] In a proof-of-stake blockchain, transactions are validated by holders of the associated cryptocurrency, sometimes grouped together in stake pools. Most cryptocurrencies are designed to gradually decrease the production of that currency, placing a cap on the total amount of that currency that will ever be in circulation. [60] Compared with ordinary currencies held by financial institutions or kept as cash on hand, cryptocurrencies can be more difficult for seizure by law enforcement. [3] Blockchain Main article: Blockchain The validity of each cryptocurrency's coins is provided by a blockchain . A blockchain is a continuously growing list of records , called blocks, which are linked and secured using cryptography. [59] [61] Each block typically contains a hash pointer as a link to a previous block, [61] a timestamp and transaction data. [62] By design, blockchains are inherently resistant to modification of the data. It is "an open, distributed ledger that can record transactions between two parties efficiently and in a verifiable and permanent way". [63] For use as a distributed ledger, a blockchain is typically managed by a peer-to-peer network collectively adhering to a protocol for validating new blocks. Once recorded, the data in any given block cannot be altered retroactively without the alteration of all subsequent blocks, which requires collusion of the network majority. Blockchains are secure by design and are an example of a distributed computing system with high Byzantine fault tolerance . Decentralized consensus has therefore been achieved with a blockchain. [64] Nodes A node is a computer that connects to a cryptocurrency network. The node supports the cryptocurrency's network through either relaying transactions, validation, or hosting a copy of the blockchain. In terms of relaying transactions, each network computer (node) has a copy of the blockchain of the cryptocurrency it supports. When a transaction is made, the node creating the transaction broadcasts details of the transaction using encryption to other nodes throughout the node network so that the transaction (and every other transaction) is known. Node owners are either volunteers, those hosted by the organization or body responsible for developing the cryptocurrency blockchain network technology, or those who are enticed to host a node to receive rewards from hosting the node network. [65] Timestamping Cryptocurrencies use various timestamping schemes to "prove" the validity of transactions added to the blockchain ledger without the need for a trusted third party. The first timestamping scheme invented was the proof-of-work scheme. The most widely used proof-of-work schemes are based on SHA-256 and scrypt . [22] Some other hashing algorithms that are used for proof-of-work include CryptoNote , Blake , SHA-3 , and X11 . Another method is called the proof-of-stake scheme. Proof-of-stake is a method of securing a cryptocurrency network and achieving distributed consensus through requesting users to show ownership of a certain amount of currency. It is different from proof-of-work systems that run difficult hashing algorithms to validate electronic transactions. The scheme is largely dependent on the coin, and there is currently no standard form of it. Some cryptocurrencies use a combined proof-of-work and proof-of-stake scheme. [22] Mining Hashcoin mine On a blockchain, mining is the validation of transactions. For this effort, successful miners obtain new cryptocurrency as a reward. The reward decreases transaction fees by creating a complementary incentive to contribute to the processing power of the network. The rate of generating hashes, which validate any transaction, has been increased by the use of specialized machines such as FPGAs and ASICs running complex hashing algorithms like SHA-256 and scrypt . [66] This arms race for cheaper-yet-efficient machines has existed since Bitcoin was introduced in 2009. [66] Mining is measured by hash rate typically in TH/s. [67] With more people entering the world of virtual currency, generating hashes for validation has become more complex over time, forcing miners to invest increasingly large sums of money to improve computing performance. Consequently, the reward for finding a hash has diminished and often does not justify the investment in equipment and cooling facilities (to mitigate the heat the equipment produces), and the electricity required to run them. [68] Popular regions for mining include those with inexpensive electricity, a cold climate, and jurisdictions with clear and conducive regulations. By July 2019, Bitcoin's electricity consumption was estimated to be approximately 7 gigawatts, around 0.2% of the global total, or equivalent to the energy consumed nationally by Switzerland. [69] Some miners pool resources , sharing their processing power over a network to split the reward equally, according to the amount of work they contributed to the probability of finding a block . A "share" is awarded to members of the mining pool who present a valid partial proof-of-work. As of February 2018 [update] , the Chinese Government has halted trading of virtual currency, banned initial coin offerings and shut down mining. Many Chinese miners have since relocated to Canada [70] and Texas. [71] One company is operating data centers for mining operations at Canadian oil and gas field sites, due to low gas prices. [72] In June 2018, Hydro Quebec proposed to the provincial government to allocate 500 megawatts of power to crypto companies for mining. [73] According to a February 2018 report from Fortune , Iceland has become a haven for cryptocurrency miners in part because of its cheap electricity. [74] In March 2018, the city of Plattsburgh, New York put an 18-month moratorium on all cryptocurrency mining in an effort to preserve natural resources and the "character and direction" of the city. [75] In 2021, Kazakhstan became the second-biggest crypto-currency mining country, producing 18.1% of the global exahash rate. The country built a compound containing 50,000 computers near Ekibastuz . [76] GPU price rise An increase in cryptocurrency mining increased the demand for graphics cards (GPU) in 2017. [77] The computing power of GPUs makes them well-suited to generating hashes. Popular favorites of cryptocurrency miners such as Nvidia's GTX 1060 and GTX 1070 graphics cards, as well as AMD's RX 570 and RX 580 GPUs, doubled or tripled in price – or were out of stock. [78] A GTX 1070 Ti which was released at a price of $450 sold for as much as $1,100. Another popular card, the GTX 1060 (6 GB model) was released at an MSRP of $250, and sold for almost $500. RX 570 and RX 580 cards from AMD were out of stock for almost a year. Miners regularly buy up the entire stock of new GPU's as soon as they are available. [79] Nvidia has asked retailers to do what they can when it comes to selling GPUs to gamers instead of miners. Boris Böhles, PR manager for Nvidia in the German region, said: "Gamers come first for Nvidia." [80] Mining accelerator chips Numerous companies developed dedicated crypto-mining accelerator chips, capable of price-performance far higher than that of CPU or GPU mining. At one point Intel marketed its own brand of crypto accelerator chip, named Blockscale . [81] Wallets An example paper printable Bitcoin wallet consisting of one Bitcoin address for receiving and the corresponding private key for spending Main article: Cryptocurrency wallet A cryptocurrency wallet is a means of storing the public and private "keys" (address) or seed which can be used to receive or spend the cryptocurrency. [82] With the private key, it is possible to write in the public ledger, effectively spending the associated cryptocurrency. With the public key, it is possible for others to send currency to the wallet. There exist multiple methods of storing keys or seed in a wallet. These methods range from using paper wallets (which are public, private or seed keys written on paper), to using hardware wallets (which are hardware to store your wallet information), to a digital wallet (which is a computer with a software hosting your wallet information), to hosting your wallet using an exchange where cryptocurrency is traded, or by storing your wallet information on a digital medium such as plaintext. [83] Anonymity Main article: Privacy and blockchain Bitcoin is pseudonymous , rather than anonymous ; the cryptocurrency in a wallet is not tied to a person, but rather to one or more specific keys (or "addresses"). [84] Thereby, Bitcoin owners are not immediately identifiable, but all transactions are publicly available in the blockchain. [85] Still, cryptocurrency exchanges are often required by law to collect the personal information of their users. [86] Some cryptocurrencies, such as Monero , Zerocoin , Zerocash , and CryptoNote , implement additional measures to increase privacy, such as by using zero-knowledge proofs . [87] [88] A recent 2020 study presented different attacks on privacy in cryptocurrencies. The attacks demonstrated how the anonymity techniques are not sufficient safeguards. In order to improve privacy, researchers suggested several different ideas including new cryptographic schemes and mechanisms for hiding the IP address of the source. [89] Economics Cryptocurrencies are used primarily outside banking and governmental institutions and are exchanged over the Internet. Block rewards Proof-of-work cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin, offer block rewards incentives for miners. There has been an implicit belief that whether miners are paid by block rewards or transaction fees does not affect the security of the blockchain, but a study suggests that this may not be the case under certain circumstances. [90] The rewards paid to miners increase the supply of the cryptocurrency. By making sure that verifying transactions is a costly business, the integrity of the network can be preserved as long as benevolent nodes control a majority of computing power. The verification algorithm requires a lot of processing power, and thus electricity in order to make verification costly enough to accurately validate public blockchain. Not only do miners have to factor in the costs associated with expensive equipment necessary to stand a chance of solving a hash problem, they must further consider the significant amount of electrical power in search of the solution. Generally, the block rewards outweigh electricity and equipment costs, but this may not always be the case. [91] The current value, not the long-term value, of the cryptocurrency supports the reward scheme to incentivize miners to engage in costly mining activities. [92] In 2018, Bitcoin's design caused a 1.4% welfare loss compared to an efficient cash system, while a cash system with 2% money growth has a minor 0.003% welfare cost. The main source for this inefficiency is the large mining cost, which is estimated to be US$360 million per year. This translates into users being willing to accept a cash system with an inflation rate of 230% before being better off using Bitcoin as a means of payment. However, the efficiency of the Bitcoin system can be significantly improved by optimizing the rate of coin creation and minimizing transaction fees. Another potential improvement is to eliminate inefficient mining activities by changing the consensus protocol altogether. [93] Transaction fees Transaction fees for cryptocurrency depend mainly on the supply of network capacity at the time, versus the demand from the currency holder for a faster transaction.[ citation needed ] The currency holder can choose a specific transaction fee, while network entities process transactions in order of highest offered fee to lowest.[ citation needed ] Cryptocurrency exchanges can simplify the process for currency holders by offering priority alternatives and thereby determine which fee will likely cause the transaction to be processed in the requested time.[ citation needed ] For Ethereum , transaction fees differ by computational complexity, bandwidth use, and storage needs, while Bitcoin transaction fees differ by transaction size and whether the transaction uses SegWit . In February 2023, the median transaction fee for Ether corresponded to $2.2845, [94] while for Bitcoin it corresponded to $0.659. [95] Some cryptocurrencies have no transaction fees, and instead rely on client-side proof-of-work as the transaction prioritization and anti-spam mechanism. [96] [97] [98] Exchanges Main article: Cryptocurrency exchange Cryptocurrency exchanges allow customers to trade cryptocurrencies [99] for other assets, such as conventional fiat money , or to trade between different digital currencies. Crypto marketplaces do not guarantee that an investor is completing a purchase or trade at the optimal price. As a result, as of 2020 it was possible to arbitrage to find the difference in price across several markets. [100] Atomic swaps Atomic swaps are a mechanism where one cryptocurrency can be exchanged directly for another cryptocurrency, without the need for a trusted third party such as an exchange. [101] ATMs Bitcoin ATM Jordan Kelley, founder of Robocoin , launched the first Bitcoin ATM in the United States on 20 February 2014. The kiosk installed in Austin, Texas, is similar to bank ATMs but has scanners to read government-issued identification such as a driver's license or a passport to confirm users' identities. [102] Initial coin offerings An initial coin offering (ICO) is a controversial means of raising funds for a new cryptocurrency venture. An ICO may be used by startups with the intention of avoiding regulation. However, securities regulators in many jurisdictions, including in the U.S., and Canada, have indicated that if a coin or token is an "investment contract" (e.g., under the Howey test, i.e., an investment of money with a reasonable expectation of profit based significantly on the entrepreneurial or managerial efforts of others), it is a security and is subject to securities regulation. In an ICO campaign, a percentage of the cryptocurrency (usually in the form of "tokens") is sold to early backers of the project in exchange for legal tender or other cryptocurrencies, often Bitcoin or Ether. [103] [104] [105] According to PricewaterhouseCoopers , four of the 10 biggest proposed initial coin offerings have used Switzerland as a base, where they are frequently registered as non-profit foundations. The Swiss regulatory agency FINMA stated that it would take a "balanced approach" to ICO projects and would allow "legitimate innovators to navigate the regulatory landscape and so launch their projects in a way consistent with national laws protecting investors and the integrity of the financial system." In response to numerous requests by industry representatives, a legislative ICO working group began to issue legal guidelines in 2018, which are intended to remove uncertainty from cryptocurrency offerings and to establish sustainable business practices. [106] Price trends The market capitalization of a cryptocurrency is calculated by multiplying the price by the number of coins in circulation. The total cryptocurrency market cap has historically been dominated by Bitcoin accounting for at least 50% of the market cap value where altcoins have increased and decreased in market cap value in relation to Bitcoin. Bitcoin's value is largely determined by speculation among other technological limiting factors known as blockchain rewards coded into the architecture technology of Bitcoin itself. The cryptocurrency market cap follows a trend known as the "halving", which is when the block rewards received from Bitcoin are halved due to technological mandated limited factors instilled into Bitcoin which in turn limits the supply of Bitcoin. As the date reaches near of a halving (twice thus far historically) the cryptocurrency market cap increases, followed by a downtrend. [107] By June 2021, cryptocurrency had begun to be offered by some wealth managers in the US for 401(k)s . [108] [109] [110] Volatility Cryptocurrency prices are much more volatile than established financial assets such as stocks . For example, over one week in May 2022, Bitcoin lost 20% of its value and Ethereum lost 26%, while Solana and Cardano lost 41% and 35% respectively. The falls were attributed to warnings about inflation. By comparison, in the same week, the Nasdaq tech stock index fell 7.6 per cent and the FTSE 100 was 3.6 per cent down. [111] In the longer term, of the 10 leading cryptocurrencies identified by the total value of coins in circulation in January 2018, only four (Bitcoin, Ethereum, Cardano and Ripple (XRP)) were still in that position in early 2022. [112] The total value of all cryptocurrencies was  $2 trillion at the end of 2021, but had halved nine months later. [113] [114] The Wall Street Journal has commented that the crypto sector has become "intertwined" with the rest of the capital markets and "sensitive to the same forces that drive tech stocks and other risk assets", such as inflation forecasts. [115] Databases There are also centralized databases, outside of blockchains, that store crypto market data. Compared to the blockchain, databases perform fast as there is no verification process. Four of the most popular cryptocurrency market databases are CoinMarketCap, CoinGecko, BraveNewCoin, and Cryptocompare. [116] Social and political aspects See also: Crypto-anarchism and Cypherpunk According to Alan Feuer of The New York Times , libertarians and anarcho-capitalists were attracted to the philosophical idea behind Bitcoin. Early Bitcoin supporter Roger Ver said: "At first, almost everyone who got involved did so for philosophical reasons. We saw Bitcoin as a great idea, as a way to separate money from the state." [117] Economist Paul Krugman argues that cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin are "something of a cult" based in "paranoid fantasies" of government power. [118] David Golumbia says that the ideas influencing Bitcoin advocates emerge from right-wing extremist movements such as the Liberty Lobby and the John Birch Society and their anti-Central Bank rhetoric, or, more recently, Ron Paul and Tea Party -style libertarianism. [119] Steve Bannon , who owns a "good stake" in Bitcoin, sees cryptocurrency as a form of disruptive populism, taking control back from central authorities. [120] Bitcoin's founder, Satoshi Nakamoto , has supported the idea that cryptocurrencies go well with libertarianism. "It's very attractive to the libertarian viewpoint if we can explain it properly," Nakamoto said in 2008. [121] According to the European Central Bank , the decentralization of money offered by Bitcoin has its theoretical roots in the Austrian school of economics , especially with Friedrich von Hayek in his book Denationalisation of Money: The Argument Refined, [122] in which Hayek advocates a complete free market in the production, distribution and management of money to end the monopoly of central banks . [123] Increasing regulation The rise in the popularity of cryptocurrencies and their adoption by financial institutions has led some governments to assess whether regulation is needed to protect users. The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has defined cryptocurrency-related services as "virtual asset service providers" (VASPs) and recommended that they be regulated with the same money laundering ( AML ) and know your customer (KYC) requirements as financial institutions. [124] In May 2020, the Joint Working Group on interVASP Messaging Standards published "IVMS 101", a universal common language for communication of required originator and beneficiary information between VASPs. The FATF and financial regulators were informed as the data model was developed. [125] In June 2020, FATF updated its guidance to include the "Travel Rule" for cryptocurrencies, a measure which mandates that VASPs obtain, hold, and exchange information about the originators and beneficiaries of virtual asset transfers. [126] Subsequent standardized protocol specifications recommended using JSON for relaying data between VASPs and identity services. As of December 2020, the IVMS 101 data model has yet to be finalized and ratified by the three global standard setting bodies that created it. [127] The European Commission published a digital finance strategy in September 2020. This included a draft regulation on Markets in Crypto-Assets (MiCA), which aimed to provide a comprehensive regulatory framework for digital assets in the EU. [128] [129] On 10 June 2021, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision proposed that banks that held cryptocurrency assets must set aside capital to cover all potential losses. For instance, if a bank were to hold Bitcoin worth $2 billion, it would be required to set aside enough capital to cover the entire $2 billion. This is a more extreme standard than banks are usually held to when it comes to other assets. However, this is a proposal and not a regulation. The IMF is seeking a coordinated, consistent and comprehensive approach to supervising cryptocurrencies. Tobias Adrian , the IMF's financial counsellor and head of its monetary and capital markets department said in a January 2022 interview that "Agreeing global regulations is never quick. But if we start now, we can achieve the goal of maintaining financial stability while also enjoying the benefits which the underlying technological innovations bring," [130] China In September 2017, China banned ICOs to cause abnormal return from cryptocurrency decreasing during announcement window. The liquidity changes by banning ICOs in China was temporarily negative while the liquidity effect became positive after news. [131] On 18 May 2021, China banned financial institutions and payment companies from being able to provide cryptocurrency transaction related services. [132] This led to a sharp fall in the price of the biggest proof of work cryptocurrencies. For instance, Bitcoin fell 31%, Ethereum fell 44%, Binance Coin fell 32% and Dogecoin fell 30%. [133] Proof of work mining was the next focus, with regulators in popular mining regions citing the use of electricity generated from highly polluting sources such as coal to create Bitcoin and Ethereum. [134] In September 2021, the Chinese government declared all cryptocurrency transactions of any kind illegal, completing its crackdown on cryptocurrency. [30] El Salvador On 9 June 2021, El Salvador announced that it will adopt Bitcoin as legal tender, becoming the first country to do so. [135] India At present, India neither prohibits nor allows investment in the cryptocurrency market. In 2020, the Supreme Court of India had lifted the ban on cryptocurrency, which was imposed by the Reserve Bank of India. [136] [137] [138] [139] Since then, an investment in cryptocurrency is considered legitimate, though there is still ambiguity about the issues regarding the extent and payment of tax on the income accrued thereupon and also its regulatory regime. But it is being contemplated that the Indian Parliament will soon pass a specific law to either ban or regulate the cryptocurrency market in India. [140] Expressing his public policy opinion on the Indian cryptocurrency market to a well-known online publication, a leading public policy lawyer and Vice President of SAARCLAW (South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation in Law) Hemant Batra has said that the "cryptocurrency market has now become very big with involvement of billions of dollars in the market hence, it is now unattainable and irreconcilable for the government to completely ban all sorts of cryptocurrency and its trading and investment". [141] He mooted regulating the cryptocurrency market rather than completely banning it. He favoured following IMF and FATF guidelines in this regard. South Africa South Africa, which has seen a large number of scams related to cryptocurrency, is said to be putting a regulatory timeline in place that will produce a regulatory framework. [142] The largest scam occurred in April 2021, where the two founders of an African-based cryptocurrency exchange called Africrypt, Raees Cajee and Ameer Cajee, disappeared with $3.8 billion worth of Bitcoin . [143] Additionally, Mirror Trading International disappeared with $170 million worth of cryptocurrency in January 2021. [143] South Korea In March 2021, South Korea implemented new legislation to strengthen their oversight of digital assets. This legislation requires all digital asset managers, providers and exchanges to be registered with the Korea Financial Intelligence Unit in order to operate in South Korea. [144] Registering with this unit requires that all exchanges are certified by the Information Security Management System and that they ensure all customers have real name bank accounts. It also requires that the CEO and board members of the exchanges have not been convicted of any crimes and that the exchange holds sufficient levels of deposit insurance to cover losses arising from hacks. [144] Switzerland Switzerland was one of the first countries to implement the FATF's Travel Rule. FINMA, the Swiss regulator, issued its own guidance to VASPs in 2019. The guidance followed the FATF's Recommendation 16, however with stricter requirements. According to FINMA's [145] requirements, VASPs need to verify the identity of the beneficiary of the transfer. Turkey On 30 April 2021, the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey banned the use of cryptocurrencies and cryptoassets for making purchases on the grounds that the use of cryptocurrencies for such payments poses significant transaction risks. [146] United Kingdom In the United Kingdom, as of 10 January 2021, all cryptocurrency firms, such as exchanges, advisors and professionals that have either a presence, market product or provide services within the UK market must register with the Financial Conduct Authority . Additionally, on 27 June 2021, the financial watchdog demanded that Binance , the world's largest cryptocurrency exchange, [147] cease all regulated activities in the UK. [148] United States In 2021, 17 states passed laws and resolutions concerning cryptocurrency regulation. [149] The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is considering what steps to take. On 8 July 2021, Senator Elizabeth Warren , part of the Senate Banking Committee , wrote to the chairman of the SEC and demanded answers on cryptocurrency regulation due to the increase in cryptocurrency exchange use and the danger this posed to consumers. On 5 August 2021, SEC Chairman Gary Gensler responded to Senator Elizabeth Warren's letter regarding cryptocurrency regulation and called for legislation focused on "crypto trading, lending and DeFi platforms," because of how vulnerable the investors could be when they traded on crypto trading platforms without a broker. He also argued that many tokens in the crypto market may be unregistered securities without required disclosures or market oversight. Additionally, Gensler did not hold back in his criticism of stablecoins. These tokens, which are pegged to the value of fiat currencies, may allow individuals to bypass important public policy goals related to traditional banking and financial systems, such as anti-money laundering, tax compliance, and sanctions. [150] On 19 October 2021, the first bitcoin-linked exchange-traded fund (ETF) from ProShares started trading on the NYSE under the ticker "BITO." ProShares CEO Michael L. Sapir said the ETF would expose Bitcoin to a wider range of investors without the hassle of setting up accounts with cryptocurrency providers. Ian Balina, the CEO of Token Metrics, stated that the approval of the "BITO" ETF by the SEC was a significant endorsement for the crypto industry because many regulators globally were not in favor of crypto as well as the hesitance to accept crypto from retail investors. This event would eventually open more opportunities for new capital and new people in this space. [151] The United States Department of the Treasury , on 20 May 2021, announced that it would require any transfer worth $10,000 or more to be reported to the Internal Revenue Service since cryptocurrency already posed a problem where illegal activity like tax evasion was facilitated broadly. This release from the IRS was a part of efforts to promote better compliance and consider more severe penalties for tax evaders. [152] On 17 February 2022, the Justice department named Eun Young Choi as the first director of a National Cryptocurrency Enforcement Team to aid in identification of and dealing with misuse of cryptocurrencies and other digital assets. [153] The Biden administration faced a dilemma as it tried to develop regulations for the cryptocurrency industry. On one hand, officials were hesitant to restrict the growing and profitable industry. On the other hand, they were committed to preventing illegal cryptocurrency transactions. To reconcile these conflicting goals, on 9 March 2022, President Biden issued an executive order. [154] Followed by the executive order, on 16 September 2022, the Comprehensive Framework for Responsible Development of Digital Assets document was released [155] to support development of cryptocurrencies and restrict their illegal use. The executive order included all digital assets, but cryptocurrencies posed both the greatest security risks and potential economic benefits. Though this might not address all of the challenges in crypto industry, it was a significant milestone in the U.S. cryptocurrency regulation history. [156] In February 2023, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) ruled that cryptocurrency exchange Kraken 's estimated $42 billion in staked assets globally operated as an illegal securities seller. The company agreed to a $30 million settlement with the SEC and to cease selling its staking service in the U.S. The case would impact other major crypto exchanges operating staking programs. [157] On 23 March 2023, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) issued an alert to investors stating that firms offering crypto asset securities may not be complying with U.S. laws. The SEC stated that unregistered offerings of crypto asset securities may not include important information. [158] Legality Main article: Legality of cryptocurrency by country or territory The legal status of cryptocurrencies varies substantially from country to country and is still undefined or changing in many of them. At least one study has shown that broad generalizations about the use of Bitcoin in illicit finance are significantly overstated and that blockchain analysis is an effective crime fighting and intelligence gathering tool. [159] While some countries have explicitly allowed their use and trade, [160] others have banned or restricted it. According to the Library of Congress in 2021, an "absolute ban" on trading or using cryptocurrencies applies in 9 countries: Algeria, Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Egypt, Iraq, Morocco, Nepal, and the United Arab Emirates. An "implicit ban" applies in another 39 countries or regions, which include: Bahrain, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Cote d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Gabon, Georgia, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Macau, Maldives, Mali, Moldova, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Republic of Congo, Saudi Arabia, Sengeal, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Togo, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Qatar and Vietnam. [161] In the United States and Canada, state and provincial securities regulators, coordinated through the North American Securities Administrators Association , are investigating "Bitcoin scams" and ICOs in 40 jurisdictions. [162] Various government agencies, departments, and courts have classified Bitcoin differently. China Central Bank banned the handling of Bitcoins by financial institutions in China in early 2014. In Russia, though owning cryptocurrency is legal, its residents are only allowed to purchase goods from other residents using the Russian ruble while nonresidents are allowed to use foreign currency. [163] Regulations and bans that apply to Bitcoin probably extend to similar cryptocurrency systems. [164] In August 2018, the Bank of Thailand announced its plans to create its own cryptocurrency, the Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC). [165] Advertising bans
Toggle the table of contents Blockchain From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Distributed data store for digital transactions For other uses, see Block chain (disambiguation) . A blockchain is a distributed ledger with growing lists of records (blocks) that are securely linked together via cryptographic hashes . [1] [2] [3] [4] Each block contains a cryptographic hash of the previous block, a timestamp , and transaction data (generally represented as a Merkle tree , where data nodes are represented by leaves). Since each block contains information about the previous block, they effectively form a chain (compare linked list data structure), with each additional block linking to the ones before it. Consequently, blockchain transactions are irreversible in that, once they are recorded, the data in any given block cannot be altered retroactively without altering all subsequent blocks. Blockchains are typically managed by a peer-to-peer (P2P) computer network for use as a public distributed ledger , where nodes collectively adhere to a consensus algorithm protocol to add and validate new transaction blocks. Although blockchain records are not unalterable, since blockchain forks are possible, blockchains may be considered secure by design and exemplify a distributed computing system with high Byzantine fault tolerance . [5] A blockchain was created by a person (or group of people) using the name (or pseudonym ) Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008 to serve as the public distributed ledger for bitcoin cryptocurrency transactions, based on previous work by Stuart Haber , W. Scott Stornetta , and Dave Bayer . [6] The implementation of the blockchain within bitcoin made it the first digital currency to solve the double-spending problem without the need for a trusted authority or central server . The bitcoin design has inspired other applications [3] [2] and blockchains that are readable by the public and are widely used by cryptocurrencies . The blockchain may be considered a type of payment rail . [7] Private blockchains have been proposed for business use. Computerworld called the marketing of such privatized blockchains without a proper security model " snake oil "; [8] however, others have argued that permissioned blockchains, if carefully designed, may be more decentralized and therefore more secure in practice than permissionless ones. [4] [9] History Bitcoin , Ethereum and Litecoin transactions per day (January 2011 – January 2021) Cryptographer David Chaum first proposed a blockchain-like protocol in his 1982 dissertation "Computer Systems Established, Maintained, and Trusted by Mutually Suspicious Groups." [10] Further work on a cryptographically secured chain of blocks was described in 1991 by Stuart Haber and W. Scott Stornetta . [4] [11] They wanted to implement a system wherein document timestamps could not be tampered with. In 1992, Haber, Stornetta, and Dave Bayer incorporated Merkle trees into the design, which improved its efficiency by allowing several document certificates to be collected into one block. [4] [12] Under their company Surety, their document certificate hashes have been published in The New York Times every week since 1995. [13] The first decentralized blockchain was conceptualized by a person (or group of people) known as Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008. Nakamoto improved the design in an important way using a Hashcash -like method to timestamp blocks without requiring them to be signed by a trusted party and introducing a difficulty parameter to stabilize the rate at which blocks are added to the chain. [4] The design was implemented the following year by Nakamoto as a core component of the cryptocurrency bitcoin , where it serves as the public ledger for all transactions on the network. [3] In August 2014, the bitcoin blockchain file size, containing records of all transactions that have occurred on the network, reached 20 GB ( gigabytes ). [14] In January 2015, the size had grown to almost 30 GB, and from January 2016 to January 2017, the bitcoin blockchain grew from 50 GB to 100 GB in size. The ledger size had exceeded 200 GB by early 2020. [15] The words block and chain were used separately in Satoshi Nakamoto's original paper, but were eventually popularized as a single word, blockchain, by 2016. [16] According to Accenture , an application of the diffusion of innovations theory suggests that blockchains attained a 13.5% adoption rate within financial services in 2016, therefore reaching the early adopters ' phase. [17] Industry trade groups joined to create the Global Blockchain Forum in 2016, an initiative of the Chamber of Digital Commerce . In May 2018, Gartner found that only 1% of CIOs indicated any kind of blockchain adoption within their organisations, and only 8% of CIOs were in the short-term "planning or [looking at] active experimentation with blockchain". [18] For the year 2019 Gartner reported 5% of CIOs believed blockchain technology was a 'game-changer' for their business. [19] Structure and design Blockchain formation. The main chain (black) consists of the longest series of blocks from the genesis block (green) to the current block. Orphan blocks (purple) exist outside of the main chain. A blockchain is a decentralized , distributed , and often public, digital ledger consisting of records called blocks that are used to record transactions across many computers so that any involved block cannot be altered retroactively, without the alteration of all subsequent blocks. [3] [20] This allows the participants to verify and audit transactions independently and relatively inexpensively. [21] A blockchain database is managed autonomously using a peer-to-peer network and a distributed timestamping server. They are authenticated by mass collaboration powered by collective self-interests . [22] Such a design facilitates robust workflow where participants' uncertainty regarding data security is marginal. The use of a blockchain removes the characteristic of infinite reproducibility from a digital asset . It confirms that each unit of value was transferred only once, solving the long-standing problem of double-spending . A blockchain has been described as a value-exchange protocol. [23] A blockchain can maintain title rights because, when properly set up to detail the exchange agreement, it provides a record that compels offer and acceptance .[ citation needed ] Logically, a blockchain can be seen as consisting of several layers: [24] infrastructure (hardware) application ( smart contracts / decentralized applications , if applicable) Blocks Blocks hold batches of valid transactions that are hashed and encoded into a Merkle tree . [3] Each block includes the cryptographic hash of the prior block in the blockchain, linking the two. The linked blocks form a chain. [3] This iterative process confirms the integrity of the previous block, all the way back to the initial block, which is known as the genesis block (Block 0). [26] [27] To assure the integrity of a block and the data contained in it, the block is usually digitally signed . [28] Sometimes separate blocks can be produced concurrently, creating a temporary fork . In addition to a secure hash-based history, any blockchain has a specified algorithm for scoring different versions of the history so that one with a higher score can be selected over others. Blocks not selected for inclusion in the chain are called orphan blocks. [27] Peers supporting the database have different versions of the history from time to time. They keep only the highest-scoring version of the database known to them. Whenever a peer receives a higher-scoring version (usually the old version with a single new block added) they extend or overwrite their own database and retransmit the improvement to their peers. There is never an absolute guarantee that any particular entry will remain in the best version of history forever. Blockchains are typically built to add the score of new blocks onto old blocks and are given incentives to extend with new blocks rather than overwrite old blocks. Therefore, the probability of an entry becoming superseded decreases exponentially [29] as more blocks are built on top of it, eventually becoming very low. [3] [30] : ch. 08 [31] For example, bitcoin uses a proof-of-work system , where the chain with the most cumulative proof-of-work is considered the valid one by the network. There are a number of methods that can be used to demonstrate a sufficient level of computation . Within a blockchain the computation is carried out redundantly rather than in the traditional segregated and parallel manner. [32] Block time The block time is the average time it takes for the network to generate one extra block in the blockchain. By the time of block completion, the included data becomes verifiable. In cryptocurrency, this is practically when the transaction takes place, so a shorter block time means faster transactions. The block time for Ethereum is set to between 14 and 15 seconds, while for bitcoin it is on average 10 minutes. [33] Hard forks This section is an excerpt from Fork (blockchain) § Hard fork .[ edit ] A hard fork is a change to the blockchain protocol that is not backward compatible and requires all users to upgrade their software in order to continue participating in the network. In a hard fork, the network splits into two separate versions: one that follows the new rules and one that follows the old rules. For example, Ethereum was hard forked in 2016 to "make whole" the investors in The DAO , which had been hacked by exploiting a vulnerability in its code. In this case, the fork resulted in a split creating Ethereum and Ethereum Classic chains. In 2014 the Nxt community was asked to consider a hard fork that would have led to a rollback of the blockchain records to mitigate the effects of a theft of 50 million NXT from a major cryptocurrency exchange . The hard fork proposal was rejected, and some of the funds were recovered after negotiations and ransom payment. Alternatively, to prevent a permanent split, a majority of nodes using the new software may return to the old rules, as was the case of bitcoin split on 12 March 2013. [34] A more recent hard-fork example is of Bitcoin in 2017, which resulted in a split creating Bitcoin Cash . [35] The network split was mainly due to a disagreement in how to increase the transactions per second to accommodate for demand. [36] Decentralization By storing data across its peer-to-peer network , the blockchain eliminates some risks that come with data being held centrally. [3] The decentralized blockchain may use ad hoc message passing and distributed networking . [37] In a so-called "51% attack" a central entity gains control of more than half of a network and can then manipulate that specific blockchain record at will, allowing double-spending . [38] Blockchain security methods include the use of public-key cryptography . [39] : 5 A public key (a long, random-looking string of numbers) is an address on the blockchain. Value tokens sent across the network are recorded as belonging to that address. A private key is like a password that gives its owner access to their digital assets or the means to otherwise interact with the various capabilities that blockchains now support. Data stored on the blockchain is generally considered incorruptible. [3] Every node in a decentralized system has a copy of the blockchain. Data quality is maintained by massive database replication [40] and computational trust . No centralized "official" copy exists and no user is "trusted" more than any other. [39] Transactions are broadcast to the network using the software. Messages are delivered on a best-effort basis. Early blockchains rely on energy-intensive mining nodes to validate transactions, [27] add them to the block they are building, and then broadcast the completed block to other nodes. [30] : ch. 08 Blockchains use various time-stamping schemes, such as proof-of-work , to serialize changes. [41] Later consensus methods include proof of stake . [27] The growth of a decentralized blockchain is accompanied by the risk of centralization because the computer resources required to process larger amounts of data become more expensive. [42] Finality Finality is the level of confidence that the well-formed block recently appended to the blockchain will not be revoked in the future (is "finalized") and thus can be trusted. Most distributed blockchain protocols, whether proof of work or proof of stake , cannot guarantee the finality of a freshly committed block, and instead rely on "probabilistic finality": as the block goes deeper into a blockchain, it is less likely to be altered or reverted by a newly found consensus. [43] Byzantine fault tolerance -based proof-of-stake protocols purport to provide so called "absolute finality": a randomly chosen validator proposes a block, the rest of validators vote on it, and, if a supermajority decision approves it, the block is irreversibly committed into the blockchain. [43] A modification of this method, an "economic finality", is used in practical protocols, like the Casper protocol used in Ethereum : validators which sign two different blocks at the same position in the blockchain are subject to "slashing", where their leveraged stake is forfeited. [43] Openness Open blockchains are more user-friendly than some traditional ownership records, which, while open to the public, still require physical access to view. Because all early blockchains were permissionless, controversy has arisen over the blockchain definition. An issue in this ongoing debate is whether a private system with verifiers tasked and authorized (permissioned) by a central authority should be considered a blockchain. [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] Proponents of permissioned or private chains argue that the term "blockchain" may be applied to any data structure that batches data into time-stamped blocks. These blockchains serve as a distributed version of multiversion concurrency control (MVCC) in databases. [49] Just as MVCC prevents two transactions from concurrently modifying a single object in a database, blockchains prevent two transactions from spending the same single output in a blockchain. [50] : 30–31 Opponents say that permissioned systems resemble traditional corporate databases, not supporting decentralized data verification, and that such systems are not hardened against operator tampering and revision. [44] [46] Nikolai Hampton of Computerworld said that "many in-house blockchain solutions will be nothing more than cumbersome databases," and "without a clear security model, proprietary blockchains should be eyed with suspicion." [8] [51] Permissionless (public) blockchain An advantage to an open, permissionless, or public, blockchain network is that guarding against bad actors is not required and no access control is needed. [29] This means that applications can be added to the network without the approval or trust of others, using the blockchain as a transport layer . [29] Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies currently secure their blockchain by requiring new entries to include proof of work. To prolong the blockchain, bitcoin uses Hashcash puzzles. While Hashcash was designed in 1997 by Adam Back , the original idea was first proposed by Cynthia Dwork and Moni Naor and Eli Ponyatovski in their 1992 paper "Pricing via Processing or Combatting Junk Mail". In 2016, venture capital investment for blockchain-related projects was weakening in the USA but increasing in China. [52] Bitcoin and many other cryptocurrencies use open (public) blockchains. As of April 2018 [update] , bitcoin has the highest market capitalization . Permissioned (private) blockchain See also: Distributed ledger Permissioned blockchains use an access control layer to govern who has access to the network. [53] It has been argued that permissioned blockchains can guarantee a certain level of decentralization, if carefully designed, as opposed to permissionless blockchains, which are often centralized in practice. [9] Disadvantages of permissioned blockchain Nikolai Hampton argued in Computerworld that "There is also no need for a '51 percent' attack on a private blockchain, as the private blockchain (most likely) already controls 100 percent of all block creation resources. If you could attack or damage the blockchain creation tools on a private corporate server, you could effectively control 100 percent of their network and alter transactions however you wished." [8] This has a set of particularly profound adverse implications during a financial crisis or debt crisis like the financial crisis of 2007–08 , where politically powerful actors may make decisions that favor some groups at the expense of others, [54] and "the bitcoin blockchain is protected by the massive group mining effort. It's unlikely that any private blockchain will try to protect records using gigawatts of computing power — it's time-consuming and expensive." [8] He also said, "Within a private blockchain there is also no 'race'; there's no incentive to use more power or discover blocks faster than competitors. This means that many in-house blockchain solutions will be nothing more than cumbersome databases." [8] Blockchain analysis The analysis of public blockchains has become increasingly important with the popularity of bitcoin , Ethereum , litecoin and other cryptocurrencies . [55] A blockchain, if it is public, provides anyone who wants access to observe and analyse the chain data, given one has the know-how. The process of understanding and accessing the flow of crypto has been an issue for many cryptocurrencies, crypto exchanges and banks. [56] [57] The reason for this is accusations of blockchain-enabled cryptocurrencies enabling illicit dark market trade of drugs, weapons, money laundering, etc. [58] A common belief has been that cryptocurrency is private and untraceable, thus leading many actors to use it for illegal purposes. This is changing and now specialised tech companies provide blockchain tracking services, making crypto exchanges, law-enforcement and banks more aware of what is happening with crypto funds and fiat -crypto exchanges. The development, some argue, has led criminals to prioritise the use of new cryptos such as Monero . [59] [60] [61] Standardisation In April 2016, Standards Australia submitted a proposal to the International Organization for Standardization to consider developing standards to support blockchain technology. This proposal resulted in the creation of ISO Technical Committee 307, Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Technologies. [62] The technical committee has working groups relating to blockchain terminology, reference architecture, security and privacy, identity, smart contracts, governance and interoperability for blockchain and DLT, as well as standards specific to industry sectors and generic government requirements. [63] [ non-primary source needed ] More than 50 countries are participating in the standardization process together with external liaisons such as the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT), the European Commission , the International Federation of Surveyors , the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE). [63] Many other national standards bodies and open standards bodies are also working on blockchain standards. [64] These include the National Institute of Standards and Technology [65] (NIST), the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization [66] (CENELEC), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers [67] (IEEE), the Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards ( OASIS ), and some individual participants in the Internet Engineering Task Force [68] (IETF). Centralized blockchain Although most of blockchain implementation are decentralized and distributed, Oracle launched a centralized blockchain table feature in Oracle 21c database . The Blockchain Table in Oracle 21c database is a centralized blockchain which provide immutable feature. Compared to decentralized blockchains, centralized blockchains normally can provide a higher throughput and lower latency of transactions than consensus-based distributed blockchains. [69] [70] Types Currently, there are at least four types of blockchain networks — public blockchains, private blockchains, consortium blockchains and hybrid blockchains. Public blockchains A public blockchain has absolutely no access restrictions. Anyone with an Internet connection can send transactions to it as well as become a validator (i.e., participate in the execution of a consensus protocol ). [71] [ self-published source? ] Usually, such networks offer economic incentives for those who secure them and utilize some type of a proof-of-stake or proof-of-work algorithm. Some of the largest, most known public blockchains are the bitcoin blockchain and the Ethereum blockchain. Private blockchains A private blockchain is permissioned. [53] One cannot join it unless invited by the network administrators. Participant and validator access is restricted . To distinguish between open blockchains and other peer-to-peer decentralized database applications that are not open ad-hoc compute clusters, the terminology Distributed Ledger (DLT) is normally used for private blockchains. Hybrid blockchains A hybrid blockchain has a combination of centralized and decentralized features. [72] The exact workings of the chain can vary based on which portions of centralization and decentralization are used. Sidechains A sidechain is a designation for a blockchain ledger that runs in parallel to a primary blockchain. [73] [74] Entries from the primary blockchain (where said entries typically represent digital assets ) can be linked to and from the sidechain; this allows the sidechain to otherwise operate independently of the primary blockchain (e.g., by using an alternate means of record keeping, alternate consensus algorithm , etc.). [75] [ better source needed ] Consortium blockchain A consortium blockchain is a type of blockchain that combines elements of both public and private blockchains. In a consortium blockchain, a group of organizations come together to create and operate the blockchain, rather than a single entity. The consortium members jointly manage the blockchain network and are responsible for validating transactions. Consortium blockchains are permissioned, meaning that only certain individuals or organizations are allowed to participate in the network. This allows for greater control over who can access the blockchain and helps to ensure that sensitive information is kept confidential. Consortium blockchains are commonly used in industries where multiple organizations need to collaborate on a common goal, such as supply chain management or financial services. One advantage of consortium blockchains is that they can be more efficient and scalable than public blockchains, as the number of nodes required to validate transactions is typically smaller. Additionally, consortium blockchains can provide greater security and reliability than private blockchains, as the consortium members work together to maintain the network. Some examples of consortium blockchains include Quorum and Hyperledger . [76] Uses Bitcoin's transactions are recorded on a publicly viewable blockchain. Blockchain technology can be integrated into multiple areas. The primary use of blockchains is as a distributed ledger for cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin ; there were also a few other operational products that had matured from proof of concept by late 2016. [52] As of 2016, some businesses have been testing the technology and conducting low-level implementation to gauge blockchain's effects on organizational efficiency in their back office . [77] In 2019, it was estimated that around $2.9 billion were invested in blockchain technology, which represents an 89% increase from the year prior. Additionally, the International Data Corp has estimated that corporate investment into blockchain technology will reach $12.4 billion by 2022. [78] Furthermore, According to PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), the second-largest professional services network in the world, blockchain technology has the potential to generate an annual business value of more than $3 trillion by 2030. PwC's estimate is further augmented by a 2018 study that they have conducted, in which PwC surveyed 600 business executives and determined that 84% have at least some exposure to utilizing blockchain technology, which indicates a significant demand and interest in blockchain technology. [79] In 2019, the BBC World Service radio and podcast series Fifty Things That Made the Modern Economy identified blockchain as a technology that would have far-reaching consequences for economics and society. The economist and Financial Times journalist and broadcaster Tim Harford discussed why the underlying technology might have much wider applications and the challenges that needed to be overcome. [80] His first broadcast was on June 29, 2019. The number of blockchain wallets quadrupled to 40 million between 2016 and 2020. [81] A paper published in 2022 discussed the potential use of blockchain technology in sustainable management . [82] Cryptocurrencies Main article: Cryptocurrency Most cryptocurrencies use blockchain technology to record transactions. For example, the bitcoin network and Ethereum network are both based on blockchain. The criminal enterprise Silk Road , which operated on Tor , utilized cryptocurrency for payments, some of which the US federal government has seized through research on the blockchain and forfeiture. [83] Governments have mixed policies on the legality of their citizens or banks owning cryptocurrencies. China implements blockchain technology in several industries including a national digital currency which launched in 2020. [84] To strengthen their respective currencies, Western governments including the European Union and the United States have initiated similar projects. [85] Smart contracts Main article: Smart contract Blockchain-based smart contracts are contracts that can be partially or fully executed or enforced without human interaction. [86] One of the main objectives of a smart contract is automated escrow . A key feature of smart contracts is that they do not need a trusted third party (such as a trustee) to act as an intermediary between contracting entities — the blockchain network executes the contract on its own. This may reduce friction between entities when transferring value and could subsequently open the door to a higher level of transaction automation. [87] An IMF staff discussion from 2018 reported that smart contracts based on blockchain technology might reduce moral hazards and optimize the use of contracts in general. But "no viable smart contract systems have yet emerged." Due to the lack of widespread use, their legal status was unclear. [88] [89] Financial services According to Reason , many banks have expressed interest in implementing distributed ledgers for use in banking and are cooperating with companies creating private blockchains, [90] [91] [92] and according to a September 2016 IBM study, this is occurring faster than expected. [93] Banks are interested in this technology not least because it has the potential to speed up back office settlement systems. [94] Moreover, as the blockchain industry has reached early maturity institutional appreciation has grown that it is, practically speaking, the infrastructure of a whole new financial industry, with all the implications which that entails. [95] Banks such as UBS are opening new research labs dedicated to blockchain technology in order to explore how blockchain can be used in financial services to increase efficiency and reduce costs. [96] [97] Berenberg , a German bank, believes that blockchain is an "overhyped technology" that has had a large number of "proofs of concept", but still has major challenges, and very few success stories. [98] The blockchain has also given rise to initial coin offerings (ICOs) as well as a new category of digital asset called security token offerings (STOs), also sometimes referred to as digital security offerings (DSOs). [99] STO/DSOs may be conducted privately or on public, regulated stock exchange and are used to tokenize traditional assets such as company shares as well as more innovative ones like intellectual property, real estate, [100] art, or individual products. A number of companies are active in this space providing services for compliant tokenization , private STOs, and public STOs. Games Main article: Blockchain game Blockchain technology, such as cryptocurrencies and non-fungible tokens (NFTs), has been used in video games for monetization . Many live-service games offer in-game customization options, such as character skins or other in-game items, which the players can earn and trade with other players using in-game currency. Some games also allow for trading of virtual items using real-world currency, but this may be illegal in some countries where video games are seen as akin to gambling, and has led to gray market issues such as skin gambling , and thus publishers typically have shied away from allowing players to earn real-world funds from games. [101] Blockchain games typically allow players to trade these in-game items for cryptocurrency, which can then be exchanged for money. [102] The first known game to use blockchain technologies was CryptoKitties , launched in November 2017, where the player would purchase NFTs with Ethereum cryptocurrency, each NFT consisting of a virtual pet that the player could breed with others to create offspring with combined traits as new NFTs. [103] [102] The game made headlines in December 2017 when one virtual pet sold for more than US$ 100,000. [104] CryptoKitties also illustrated scalability problems for games on Ethereum when it created significant congestion on the Ethereum network in early 2018 with approximately 30% of all Ethereum transactions[ clarification needed ] being for the game. [105] [106] By the early 2020s, there had not been a breakout success in video games using blockchain, as these games tend to focus on using blockchain for speculation instead of more traditional forms of gameplay, which offers limited appeal to most players. Such games also represent a high risk to investors as their revenues can be difficult to predict. [102] However, limited successes of some games, such as Axie Infinity during the COVID-19 pandemic , and corporate plans towards metaverse content, refueled interest in the area of GameFi, a term describing the intersection of video games and financing typically backed by blockchain currency, in the second half of 2021. [107] Several major publishers, including Ubisoft , Electronic Arts , and Take Two Interactive , have stated that blockchain and NFT-based games are under serious consideration for their companies in the future. [108] In October 2021, Valve Corporation banned blockchain games, including those using cryptocurrency and NFTs , from being hosted on its Steam digital storefront service, which is widely used for personal computer gaming, claiming that this was an extension of their policy banning games that offered in-game items with real-world value. Valve's prior history with gambling , specifically skin gambling , was speculated to be a factor in the decision to ban blockchain games. [109] Journalists and players responded positively to Valve's decision as blockchain and NFT games have a reputation for scams and fraud among most PC gamers, [101] [109] and Epic Games , which runs the Epic Games Store in competition to Steam, said that they would be open to accepted blockchain games in the wake of Valve's refusal. [110] Supply chain This section needs to be updated. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (August 2023) There have been several different efforts to employ blockchains in supply chain management . Precious commodities mining — Blockchain technology has been used for tracking the origins of gemstones and other precious commodities. In 2016, The Wall Street Journal reported that the blockchain technology company Everledger was partnering with IBM 's blockchain-based tracking service to trace the origin of diamonds to ensure that they were ethically mined. [111] As of 2019, the Diamond Trading Company (DTC) has been involved in building a diamond trading supply chain product called Tracer. [112] Food supply — As of 2018, Walmart and IBM were running a trial to use a blockchain-backed system for supply chain monitoring for lettuce and spinach — all nodes of the blockchain were administered by Walmart and were located on the IBM cloud . [113] Fashion industry — There is an opaque relationship between brands, distributors, and customers in the fashion industry, which will prevent the sustainable and stable development of the fashion industry. Blockchain makes up for this shortcoming and makes information transparent, solving the difficulty of sustainable development of the industry. [114] Motor vehicles — Mercedes-Benz and partner Icertis developed a blockchain prototype used to facilitate consistent documentation of contracts along the supply chain so that the ethical standards and contractual obligations required of its direct suppliers can be passed on to second tier suppliers and beyond. [115] [116] In another project, the company uses blockchain technology to track the emissions of climate-relevant gases and the amount of secondary material along the supply chain for its battery cell manufacturers. [117] Domain names There are several different efforts to offer domain name services via the blockchain. These domain names can be controlled by the use of a private key, which purports to allow for uncensorable websites. This would also bypass a registrar's ability to suppress domains used for fraud, abuse, or illegal content. [118] Namecoin is a cryptocurrency that supports the ".bit" top-level domain (TLD). Namecoin was forked from bitcoin in 2011. The .bit TLD is not sanctioned by ICANN , instead requiring an alternative DNS root . [118] As of 2015, .bit was used by 28 websites, out of 120,000 registered names. [119] Namecoin was dropped by OpenNIC in 2019, due to malware and potential other legal issues. [120] Other blockchain alternatives to ICANN include The Handshake Network, [119] EmerDNS, and Unstoppable Domains. [118] Specific TLDs include ".eth", ".luxe", and ".kred", which are associated with the Ethereum blockchain through the Ethereum Name Service (ENS). The .kred TLD also acts as an alternative to conventional cryptocurrency wallet addresses as a convenience for transferring cryptocurrency. [121] Other uses Blockchain technology can be used to create a permanent, public, transparent ledger system for compiling data on sales, tracking digital use and payments to content creators, such as wireless users [122] or musicians. [123] The Gartner 2019 CIO Survey reported 2% of higher education respondents had launched blockchain projects and another 18% were planning academic projects in the next 24 months. [124] In 2017, IBM partnered with ASCAP and PRS for Music to adopt blockchain technology in music distribution. [125] Imogen Heap 's Mycelia service has also been proposed as a blockchain-based alternative "that gives artists more control over how their songs and associated data circulate among fans and other musicians." [126] [127] New distribution methods are available for the insurance industry such as peer-to-peer insurance , parametric insurance and microinsurance following the adoption of blockchain. [128] [129] The sharing economy and IoT are also set to benefit from blockchains because they involve many collaborating peers. [130] The use of blockchain in libraries is being studied with a grant from the U.S. Institute of Museum and Library Services. [131] Other blockchain designs include Hyperledger , a collaborative effort from the Linux Foundation to support blockchain-based distributed ledgers, with projects under this initiative including Hyperledger Burrow (by Monax) and Hyperledger Fabric (spearheaded by IBM). [132] [133] [134] Another is Quorum, a permissioned private blockchain by JPMorgan Chase with private storage, used for contract applications. [135] Blockchain is also being used in peer-to-peer energy trading . [136] [137] [138] Lightweight blockchains, or simplified blockchains, are more suitable for internet of things (IoT) applications than conventional blockchains. [139] One experiment suggested that a lightweight blockchain-based network could accommodate up to 1.34 million authentication processes every second, which could be sufficient for resource-constrained IoT networks. [140] Blockchain could be used in detecting counterfeits by associating unique identifiers to products, documents and shipments, and storing records associated with transactions that cannot be forged or altered. [141] [142] It is however argued that blockchain technology needs to be supplemented with technologies that provide a strong binding between physical objects and blockchain systems, [143] as well as provisions for content creator verification ala KYC standards . [144] The EUIPO established an Anti-Counterfeiting Blockathon Forum, with the objective of "defining, piloting and implementing" an anti-counterfeiting infrastructure at the European level. [145] [146] The Dutch Standardisation organisation NEN uses blockchain together with QR Codes to authenticate certificates. [147] Beijing and Shanghai are among the cities designated by China to trial blockchain applications as January 30, 2022. [148] In Chinese legal proceedings, blockchain technology was first accepted as a method for authenticating internet evidence by the Hangzhou Internet Court in 2019 and has since been accepted by other Chinese courts. [149] : 123–125 Blockchain interoperability With the increasing number of blockchain systems appearing, even only those that support cryptocurrencies, blockchain interoperability is becoming a topic of major importance. The objective is to support transferring assets from one blockchain system to another blockchain system. Wegner [150] stated that " interoperability is the ability of two or more software components to cooperate despite differences in language, interface, and execution platform". The objective of blockchain interoperability is therefore to support such cooperation among blockchain systems, despite those kinds of differences. There are already several blockchain interoperability solutions available. [151] They can be classified into three categories: cryptocurrency interoperability approaches, blockchain engines, and blockchain connectors. Several individual IETF participants produced the draft of a blockchain interoperability architecture. [152] Energy consumption concerns Some cryptocurrencies use blockchain mining — the peer-to-peer computer computations by which transactions are validated and verified. This requires a large amount of energy. In June 2018, the Bank for International Settlements criticized the use of public proof-of-work blockchains for their high energy consumption. [153] [154] [155] Early concern over the high energy consumption was a factor in later blockchains such as Cardano (2017), Solana (2020) and Polkadot (2020) adopting the less energy-intensive proof-of-stake model. Researchers have estimated that Bitcoin consumes 100,000 times as much energy as proof-of-stake networks. [156] [157] In 2021, a study by Cambridge University determined that Bitcoin (at 121 terawatt-hours per year) used more electricity than Argentina (at 121TWh) and the Netherlands (109TWh). [158] According to Digiconomist, one bitcoin transaction required 708 kilowatt-hours of electrical energy, the amount an average U.S. household consumed in 24 days. [159] In February 2021, U.S. Treasury secretary Janet Yellen called Bitcoin "an extremely inefficient way to conduct transactions", saying "the amount of energy consumed in processing those transactions is staggering". [160] In March 2021, Bill Gates stated that "Bitcoin uses more electricity per transaction than any other method known to mankind", adding "It's not a great climate thing." [161] Nicholas Weaver, of the International Computer Science Institute at the University of California, Berkeley , examined blockchain's online security, and the energy efficiency of proof-of-work public blockchains, and in both cases found it grossly inadequate. [162] [163] The 31TWh-45TWh of electricity used for bitcoin in 2018 produced 17-23 million tonnes of CO2. [164] [165] By 2022, the University of Cambridge and Digiconomist estimated that the two largest proof-of-work blockchains, Bitcoin and Ethereum, together used twice as much electricity in one year as the whole of Sweden, leading to the release of up to 120 million tonnes of CO2 each year. [166] Some cryptocurrency developers are considering moving from the proof-of-work model to the proof-of-stake model. [167] Academic research Blockchain panel discussion at the first IEEE Computer Society TechIgnite conference In October 2014, the MIT Bitcoin Club, with funding from MIT alumni, provided undergraduate students at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology access to $100 of bitcoin. The adoption rates, as studied by Catalini and Tucker (2016), revealed that when people who typically adopt technologies early are given delayed access, they tend to reject the technology. [168] Many universities have founded departments focusing on crypto and blockchain, including MIT , in 2017. In the same year, Edinburgh became "one of the first big European universities to launch a blockchain course", according to the Financial Times. [169] Adoption decision Motivations for adopting blockchain technology (an aspect of innovation adoptation ) have been investigated by researchers. For example, Janssen, et al. provided a framework for analysis, [170] and Koens & Poll pointed out that adoption could be heavily driven by non-technical factors. [171] Based on behavioral models, Li [172] has discussed the differences between adoption at the individual level and organizational levels. Collaboration Scholars in business and management have started studying the role of blockchains to support collaboration. [173] [174] It has been argued that blockchains can foster both cooperation (i.e., prevention of opportunistic behavior) and coordination (i.e., communication and information sharing). Thanks to reliability, transparency, traceability of records, and information immutability, blockchains facilitate collaboration in a way that differs both from the traditional use of contracts and from relational norms. Contrary to contracts, blockchains do not directly rely on the legal system to enforce agreements. [175] In addition, contrary to the use of relational norms, blockchains do not require a trust or direct connections between collaborators. Blockchain and internal audit Blockchain Basics & Cryptography , Gary Gensler , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 0:30 [176] The need for internal audits to provide effective oversight of organizational efficiency will require a change in the way that information is accessed in new formats. [177] Blockchain adoption requires a framework to identify the risk of exposure associated with transactions using blockchain. The Institute of Internal Auditors has identified the need for internal auditors to address this transformational technology. New methods are required to develop audit plans that identify threats and risks. The Internal Audit Foundation study, Blockchain and Internal Audit, assesses these factors. [178] The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has outlined new roles for auditors as a result of blockchain. [179] Journals Main article: Ledger (journal) In September 2015, the first peer-reviewed academic journal dedicated to cryptocurrency and blockchain technology research, Ledger, was announced. The inaugural issue was published in December 2016. [180] The journal covers aspects of mathematics , computer science , engineering , law , economics and philosophy that relate to cryptocurrencies. [181] [182] The journal encourages authors to digitally sign a file hash of submitted papers, which are then timestamped into the bitcoin blockchain. Authors are also asked to include a personal bitcoin address on the first page of their papers for non-repudiation purposes. [183] See also Changelog – a record of all notable changes made to a project Checklist – an informational aid used to reduce failure
Toggle the table of contents Quantum computing From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Technology that uses quantum mechanics Quantum System One , a quantum computer by IBM from 2019 with 20 superconducting qubits [1] A quantum computer is a computer that takes advantage of quantum mechanical phenomena. On small scales, physical matter exhibits properties of both particles and waves , and quantum computing leverages this behavior, specifically quantum superposition and entanglement , using specialized hardware that supports the preparation and manipulation of quantum states . Classical physics cannot explain the operation of these quantum devices, and a scalable quantum computer could perform some calculations exponentially faster (with respect to input size scaling) [2] than any modern "classical" computer . In particular, a large-scale quantum computer could break widely used encryption schemes and aid physicists in performing physical simulations ; however, the current state of the technology is largely experimental and impractical, with several obstacles to useful applications. Moreover, scalable quantum computers do not hold promise for many practical tasks, and for many important tasks quantum speedups are proven impossible. The basic unit of information in quantum computing is the qubit , similar to the bit in traditional digital electronics. Unlike a classical bit, a qubit can exist in a superposition of its two "basis" states. When measuring a qubit, the result is a probabilistic output of a classical bit, therefore making quantum computers nondeterministic in general. If a quantum computer manipulates the qubit in a particular way, wave interference effects can amplify the desired measurement results. The design of quantum algorithms involves creating procedures that allow a quantum computer to perform calculations efficiently and quickly. Physically engineering high-quality qubits has proven challenging. If a physical qubit is not sufficiently isolated from its environment, it suffers from quantum decoherence , introducing noise into calculations. Paradoxically, perfectly isolating qubits is also undesirable because quantum computations typically need to initialize qubits, perform controlled qubit interactions, and measure the resulting quantum states. Each of those operations introduces errors and suffers from noise, and such inaccuracies accumulate. In principle, a non-quantum (classical) computer can solve the same computational problems as a quantum computer, given enough time. Quantum advantage comes in the form of time complexity rather than computability , and quantum complexity theory shows that some quantum algorithms for carefully selected tasks require exponentially fewer computational steps than the best known non-quantum algorithms. Such tasks can in theory be solved on a large-scale quantum computer whereas classical computers would not finish computations in any reasonable amount of time. However, quantum speedup is not universal or even typical across computational tasks, since basic tasks such as sorting are proven to not allow any asymptotic quantum speedup. Claims of quantum supremacy have drawn significant attention to the discipline, but are demonstrated on contrived tasks, while near-term practical use cases remain limited. For many years, the fields of quantum mechanics and computer science formed distinct academic communities. [3] Modern quantum theory developed in the 1920s to explain the wave–particle duality observed at atomic scales, [4] and digital computers emerged in the following decades to replace human computers for tedious calculations. [5] Both disciplines had practical applications during World War II ; computers played a major role in wartime cryptography , [6] and quantum physics was essential for the nuclear physics used in the Manhattan Project . [7] As physicists applied quantum mechanical models to computational problems and swapped digital bits for qubits , the fields of quantum mechanics and computer science began to converge. In 1980, Paul Benioff introduced the quantum Turing machine , which uses quantum theory to describe a simplified computer. [8] When digital computers became faster, physicists faced an exponential increase in overhead when simulating quantum dynamics , [9] prompting Yuri Manin and Richard Feynman to independently suggest that hardware based on quantum phenomena might be more efficient for computer simulation. [10] [11] [12] In a 1984 paper, Charles Bennett and Gilles Brassard applied quantum theory to cryptography protocols and demonstrated that quantum key distribution could enhance information security . [13] [14] Peter Shor (pictured here in 2017) showed in 1994 that a scalable quantum computer would be able to break RSA encryption . Quantum algorithms then emerged for solving oracle problems , such as Deutsch's algorithm in 1985, [15] the Bernstein–Vazirani algorithm in 1993, [16] and Simon's algorithm in 1994. [17] These algorithms did not solve practical problems, but demonstrated mathematically that one could gain more information by querying a black box with a quantum state in superposition , sometimes referred to as quantum parallelism. [18] Peter Shor built on these results with his 1994 algorithms for breaking the widely used RSA and Diffie–Hellman encryption protocols, [19] which drew significant attention to the field of quantum computing. [20] In 1996, Grover's algorithm established a quantum speedup for the widely applicable unstructured search problem. [21] [22] The same year, Seth Lloyd proved that quantum computers could simulate quantum systems without the exponential overhead present in classical simulations, [23] validating Feynman's 1982 conjecture. [24] Over the years, experimentalists have constructed small-scale quantum computers using trapped ions and superconductors . [25] In 1998, a two-qubit quantum computer demonstrated the feasibility of the technology, [26] [27] and subsequent experiments have increased the number of qubits and reduced error rates. [25] In 2019, Google AI and NASA announced that they had achieved quantum supremacy with a 54-qubit machine, performing a computation that is impossible for any classical computer. [28] [29] [30] However, the validity of this claim is still being actively researched. [31] [32] In Finland, a new 20-qubit quantum computer finished in 2023 further strengthens Finland’s position among the countries investing into quantum computing. Finland completed its first quantum computer, a 5-qubit one, in 2021. [33] The threshold theorem shows how increasing the number of qubits can mitigate errors, [34] yet fully fault-tolerant quantum computing remains "a rather distant dream". [35] According to some researchers, noisy intermediate-scale quantum ( NISQ ) machines may have specialized uses in the near future, but noise in quantum gates limits their reliability. [35] Investment in quantum computing research has increased in the public and private sectors. [36] [37] As one consulting firm summarized, [38] ... investment dollars are pouring in, and quantum-computing start-ups are proliferating. ... While quantum computing promises to help businesses solve problems that are beyond the reach and speed of conventional high-performance computers , use cases are largely experimental and hypothetical at this early stage. With focus on business management’s point of view, the potential applications of quantum computing into four major categories are cybersecurity, data analytics and artificial intelligence, optimization and simulation, and data management and searching. [39] In December 2023, physicists, for the first time, report the entanglement of individual molecules, which may have significant applications in quantum computing. [40] Also in December 2023, scientists at Harvard successfully created "quantum circuits" that correct errors more efficiently than alternative methods, which may potentially remove a major obstacle to practical quantum computers. [41] [42] The Harvard research team was supported by MIT , QuEra Computing , Caltech , and Princeton and funded by DARPA 's Optimization with Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum devices (ONISQ) program. [43] [44] Research efforts are ongoing to jumpstart quantum computing through topological and photonic approaches as well. [45] Quantum information processing[ edit ] See also: Introduction to quantum mechanics Computer engineers typically describe a modern computer 's operation in terms of classical electrodynamics . Within these "classical" computers, some components (such as semiconductors and random number generators ) may rely on quantum behavior, but these components are not isolated from their environment, so any quantum information quickly decoheres . While programmers may depend on probability theory when designing a randomized algorithm , quantum mechanical notions like superposition and interference are largely irrelevant for program analysis . Quantum programs , in contrast, rely on precise control of coherent quantum systems. Physicists describe these systems mathematically using linear algebra . Complex numbers model probability amplitudes , vectors model quantum states , and matrices model the operations that can be performed on these states. Programming a quantum computer is then a matter of composing operations in such a way that the resulting program computes a useful result in theory and is implementable in practice. As physicist Charlie Bennett describes the relationship between quantum and classical computers, [46] A classical computer is a quantum computer ... so we shouldn't be asking about "where do quantum speedups come from?" We should say, "well, all computers are quantum. ... Where do classical slowdowns come from?" Bloch sphere representation of a qubit. The state ψ {\displaystyle |\psi \rangle =\alpha |0\rangle +\beta |1\rangle } is a point on the surface of the sphere, partway between the poles, 0 {\displaystyle |1\rangle } . Just as the bit is the basic concept of classical information theory, the qubit is the fundamental unit of quantum information . The same term qubit is used to refer to an abstract mathematical model and to any physical system that is represented by that model. A classical bit, by definition, exists in either of two physical states, which can be denoted 0 and 1. A qubit is also described by a state, and two states often written 0 1 {\displaystyle |1\rangle } serve as the quantum counterparts of the classical states 0 and 1. However, the quantum states 0 1 {\displaystyle |1\rangle } belong to a vector space , meaning that they can be multiplied by constants and added together, and the result is again a valid quantum state. Such a combination is known as a superposition of 0 A two-dimensional vector mathematically represents a qubit state. Physicists typically use Dirac notation for quantum mechanical linear algebra , writing ψ 'ket psi ' for a vector labeled ψ . Because a qubit is a two-state system, any qubit state takes the form α {\displaystyle \alpha |0\rangle +\beta |1\rangle } , where are the standard basis states, [a] and α are the probability amplitudes , which are in general complex numbers . [48] If either α β {\displaystyle \beta } is zero, the qubit is effectively a classical bit; when both are nonzero, the qubit is in superposition. Such a quantum state vector acts similarly to a (classical) probability vector , with one key difference: unlike probabilities, probability amplitudes are not necessarily positive numbers. [50] Negative amplitudes allow for destructive wave interference. When a qubit is measured in the standard basis , the result is a classical bit. The Born rule describes the norm-squared correspondence between amplitudes and probabilities—when measuring a qubit α {\displaystyle \alpha |0\rangle +\beta |1\rangle } , the state collapses to . Any valid qubit state has coefficients α {\displaystyle |\alpha |^{2}+|\beta |^{2}=1} . As an example, measuring the qubit 1 {\displaystyle 1/{\sqrt {2}}|0\rangle +1/{\sqrt {2}}|1\rangle } would produce either {\displaystyle |1\rangle } with equal probability. Each additional qubit doubles the dimension of the state space . [49] As an example, the vector 1/√2|00⟩ + 1/√2|01⟩ represents a two-qubit state, a tensor product of the qubit |0⟩ with the qubit 1/√2|0⟩ + 1/√2|1⟩. This vector inhabits a four-dimensional vector space spanned by the basis vectors |00⟩, |01⟩, |10⟩, and |11⟩. The Bell state 1/√2|00⟩ + 1/√2|11⟩ is impossible to decompose into the tensor product of two individual qubits—the two qubits are entangled because their probability amplitudes are correlated . In general, the vector space for an n-qubit system is 2n-dimensional, and this makes it challenging for a classical computer to simulate a quantum one: representing a 100-qubit system requires storing 2100 classical values. See also: Unitarity (physics) The state of this one-qubit quantum memory can be manipulated by applying quantum logic gates , analogous to how classical memory can be manipulated with classical logic gates . One important gate for both classical and quantum computation is the NOT gate, which can be represented by a matrix X . {\displaystyle X:={\begin{pmatrix}0&1\\1&0\end{pmatrix}}.} Mathematically, the application of such a logic gate to a quantum state vector is modelled with matrix multiplication . Thus X {\displaystyle X|0\rangle =|1\rangle } and {\displaystyle X|1\rangle =|0\rangle } . The mathematics of single qubit gates can be extended to operate on multi-qubit quantum memories in two important ways. One way is simply to select a qubit and apply that gate to the target qubit while leaving the remainder of the memory unaffected. Another way is to apply the gate to its target only if another part of the memory is in a desired state. These two choices can be illustrated using another example. The possible states of a two-qubit quantum memory are 00 ) . {\displaystyle |00\rangle :={\begin{pmatrix}1\\0\\0\\0\end{pmatrix}};\quad |01\rangle :={\begin{pmatrix}0\\1\\0\\0\end{pmatrix}};\quad |10\rangle :={\begin{pmatrix}0\\0\\1\\0\end{pmatrix}};\quad |11\rangle :={\begin{pmatrix}0\\0\\0\\1\end{pmatrix}}.} The controlled NOT (CNOT) gate can then be represented using the following matrix: CNOT ) . {\displaystyle \operatorname {CNOT} :={\begin{pmatrix}1&0&0&0\\0&1&0&0\\0&0&0&1\\0&0&1&0\end{pmatrix}}.} As a mathematical consequence of this definition, CNOT {\textstyle \operatorname {CNOT} |00\rangle =|00\rangle } , {\textstyle \operatorname {CNOT} |01\rangle =|01\rangle } , {\textstyle \operatorname {CNOT} |10\rangle =|11\rangle } , and {\textstyle \operatorname {CNOT} |11\rangle =|10\rangle } . In other words, the CNOT applies a NOT gate ( X {\textstyle X} from before) to the second qubit if and only if the first qubit is in the state 1 . If the first qubit is 0 {\textstyle |0\rangle } , nothing is done to either qubit. In summary, quantum computation can be described as a network of quantum logic gates and measurements. However, any measurement can be deferred to the end of quantum computation, though this deferment may come at a computational cost, so most quantum circuits depict a network consisting only of quantum logic gates and no measurements. Quantum parallelism[ edit ] Quantum parallelism is the heuristic that quantum computers can be thought of as evaluating a function for multiple input values simultaneously. This can be achieved by preparing a quantum system in a superposition of input states, and applying a unitary transformation that encodes the function to be evaluated. The resulting state encodes the function's output values for all input values in the superposition, allowing for the computation of multiple outputs simultaneously. This property is key to the speedup of many quantum algorithms. However, "parallelism" in this sense is insufficient to speed up a computation, because the measurement at the end of the computation gives only one value. To be useful, a quantum algorithm must also incorporate some other conceptual ingredient. [51] [52] Further information: Quantum programming There are a number of models of computation for quantum computing, distinguished by the basic elements in which the computation is decomposed. A quantum circuit diagram implementing a Toffoli gate from more primitive gates A quantum gate array decomposes computation into a sequence of few-qubit quantum gates . A quantum computation can be described as a network of quantum logic gates and measurements. However, any measurement can be deferred to the end of quantum computation, though this deferment may come at a computational cost, so most quantum circuits depict a network consisting only of quantum logic gates and no measurements. Any quantum computation (which is, in the above formalism, any unitary matrix of size 2 {\displaystyle 2^{n}\times 2^{n}} over n {\displaystyle n} qubits) can be represented as a network of quantum logic gates from a fairly small family of gates. A choice of gate family that enables this construction is known as a universal gate set , since a computer that can run such circuits is a universal quantum computer . One common such set includes all single-qubit gates as well as the CNOT gate from above. This means any quantum computation can be performed by executing a sequence of single-qubit gates together with CNOT gates. Though this gate set is infinite, it can be replaced with a finite gate set by appealing to the Solovay-Kitaev theorem . Measurement-based quantum computing[ edit ] A measurement-based quantum computer decomposes computation into a sequence of Bell state measurements and single-qubit quantum gates applied to a highly entangled initial state (a cluster state ), using a technique called quantum gate teleportation . Adiabatic quantum computing[ edit ] An adiabatic quantum computer , based on quantum annealing , decomposes computation into a slow continuous transformation of an initial Hamiltonian into a final Hamiltonian, whose ground states contain the solution. [53] Neuromorphic quantum computing[ edit ] Neuromorphic quantum computing (abbreviated as ‘n.quantum computing’) is an unconventional computing type of computing that uses neuromorphic computing to perform quantum operations. It was suggested that quantum algorithms , which are algorithms that run on a realistic model of quantum computation , can be computed equally efficiently with neuromorphic quantum computing. Both, traditional quantum computing and neuromorphic quantum computing are physics-based unconventional computing approaches to computations and don’t follow the von Neumann architecture . They both construct a system (a circuit) that represents the physical problem at hand, and then leverage their respective physics properties of the system to seek the “minimum”. Neuromorphic quantum computing and quantum computing share similar physical properties during computation. Topological quantum computing[ edit ] A topological quantum computer decomposes computation into the braiding of anyons in a 2D lattice. [54] Quantum Turing machine[ edit ] A quantum Turing machine is the quantum analog of a Turing machine . [8] All of these models of computation—quantum circuits, [55] one-way quantum computation, [56] adiabatic quantum computation, [57] and topological quantum computation [58] —have been shown to be equivalent to the quantum Turing machine; given a perfect implementation of one such quantum computer, it can simulate all the others with no more than polynomial overhead. This equivalence need not hold for practical quantum computers, since the overhead of simulation may be too large to be practical. Quantum cryptography and cybersecurity[ edit ] Quantum computing has significant potential applications in the fields of cryptography and cybersecurity. Quantum cryptography, which relies on the principles of quantum mechanics, offers the possibility of secure communication channels that are resistant to eavesdropping. Quantum key distribution (QKD) protocols, such as BB84, enable the secure exchange of cryptographic keys between parties, ensuring the confidentiality and integrity of communication. Moreover, quantum random number generators (QRNGs) can produce high-quality random numbers, which are essential for secure encryption. However, quantum computing also poses challenges to traditional cryptographic systems. Shor's algorithm, a quantum algorithm for integer factorization, could potentially break widely used public-key cryptography schemes like RSA, which rely on the difficulty of factoring large numbers. Post-quantum cryptography, which involves the development of cryptographic algorithms that are resistant to attacks by both classical and quantum computers, is an active area of research aimed at addressing this concern. Ongoing research in quantum cryptography and post-quantum cryptography is crucial for ensuring the security of communication and data in the face of evolving quantum computing capabilities. Advances in these fields, such as the development of new QKD protocols, the improvement of QRNGs, and the standardization of post-quantum cryptographic algorithms, will play a key role in maintaining the integrity and confidentiality of information in the quantum era. [59] Further information: Quantum information science Quantum cryptography enables new ways to transmit data securely; for example, quantum key distribution uses entangled quantum states to establish secure cryptographic keys . [60] When a sender and receiver exchange quantum states, they can guarantee that an adversary does not intercept the message, as any unauthorized eavesdropper would disturb the delicate quantum system and introduce a detectable change. [61] With appropriate cryptographic protocols , the sender and receiver can thus establish shared private information resistant to eavesdropping. [13] [62] Modern fiber-optic cables can transmit quantum information over relatively short distances. Ongoing experimental research aims to develop more reliable hardware (such as quantum repeaters), hoping to scale this technology to long-distance quantum networks with end-to-end entanglement. Theoretically, this could enable novel technological applications, such as distributed quantum computing and enhanced quantum sensing . [63] [64] Algorithms[ edit ] Progress in finding quantum algorithms typically focuses on this quantum circuit model, though exceptions like the quantum adiabatic algorithm exist. Quantum algorithms can be roughly categorized by the type of speedup achieved over corresponding classical algorithms. [65] Quantum algorithms that offer more than a polynomial speedup over the best-known classical algorithm include Shor's algorithm for factoring and the related quantum algorithms for computing discrete logarithms , solving Pell's equation , and more generally solving the hidden subgroup problem for abelian finite groups. [65] These algorithms depend on the primitive of the quantum Fourier transform . No mathematical proof has been found that shows that an equally fast classical algorithm cannot be discovered, but evidence suggests that this is unlikely. [66] Certain oracle problems like Simon's problem and the Bernstein–Vazirani problem do give provable speedups, though this is in the quantum query model , which is a restricted model where lower bounds are much easier to prove and doesn't necessarily translate to speedups for practical problems. Other problems, including the simulation of quantum physical processes from chemistry and solid-state physics, the approximation of certain Jones polynomials , and the quantum algorithm for linear systems of equations have quantum algorithms appearing to give super-polynomial speedups and are BQP -complete. Because these problems are BQP-complete, an equally fast classical algorithm for them would imply that no quantum algorithm gives a super-polynomial speedup, which is believed to be unlikely. [67] Some quantum algorithms, like Grover's algorithm and amplitude amplification , give polynomial speedups over corresponding classical algorithms. [65] Though these algorithms give comparably modest quadratic speedup, they are widely applicable and thus give speedups for a wide range of problems. [22] Simulation of quantum systems[ edit ] Main article: Quantum simulation Since chemistry and nanotechnology rely on understanding quantum systems, and such systems are impossible to simulate in an efficient manner classically, quantum simulation may be an important application of quantum computing. [68] Quantum simulation could also be used to simulate the behavior of atoms and particles at unusual conditions such as the reactions inside a collider . [69] In June 2023, IBM computer scientists reported that a quantum computer produced better results for a physics problem than a conventional supercomputer. [70] [71] About 2% of the annual global energy output is used for nitrogen fixation to produce ammonia for the Haber process in the agricultural fertilizer industry (even though naturally occurring organisms also produce ammonia). Quantum simulations might be used to understand this process and increase the energy efficiency of production. [72] It is expected that an early use of quantum computing will be modeling that improves the efficiency of the Haber–Bosch process [73] by the mid 2020s [74] although some have predicted it will take longer. [75] Main article: Post-quantum cryptography A notable application of quantum computation is for attacks on cryptographic systems that are currently in use. Integer factorization , which underpins the security of public key cryptographic systems, is believed to be computationally infeasible with an ordinary computer for large integers if they are the product of few prime numbers (e.g., products of two 300-digit primes). [76] By comparison, a quantum computer could solve this problem exponentially faster using Shor's algorithm to find its factors. [77] This ability would allow a quantum computer to break many of the cryptographic systems in use today, in the sense that there would be a polynomial time (in the number of digits of the integer) algorithm for solving the problem. In particular, most of the popular public key ciphers are based on the difficulty of factoring integers or the discrete logarithm problem, both of which can be solved by Shor's algorithm. In particular, the RSA , Diffie–Hellman , and elliptic curve Diffie–Hellman algorithms could be broken. These are used to protect secure Web pages, encrypted email, and many other types of data. Breaking these would have significant ramifications for electronic privacy and security. Identifying cryptographic systems that may be secure against quantum algorithms is an actively researched topic under the field of post-quantum cryptography. [78] [79] Some public-key algorithms are based on problems other than the integer factorization and discrete logarithm problems to which Shor's algorithm applies, like the McEliece cryptosystem based on a problem in coding theory . [78] [80] Lattice-based cryptosystems are also not known to be broken by quantum computers, and finding a polynomial time algorithm for solving the dihedral hidden subgroup problem , which would break many lattice based cryptosystems, is a well-studied open problem. [81] It has been proven that applying Grover's algorithm to break a symmetric (secret key) algorithm by brute force requires time equal to roughly 2n/2 invocations of the underlying cryptographic algorithm, compared with roughly 2n in the classical case, [82] meaning that symmetric key lengths are effectively halved: AES-256 would have the same security against an attack using Grover's algorithm that AES-128 has against classical brute-force search (see Key size ). Main article: Grover's algorithm The most well-known example of a problem that allows for a polynomial quantum speedup is unstructured search, which involves finding a marked item out of a list of n items in a database. This can be solved by Grover's algorithm using O queries to the database, quadratically fewer than the Ω ) {\displaystyle \Omega (n)} queries required for classical algorithms. In this case, the advantage is not only provable but also optimal: it has been shown that Grover's algorithm gives the maximal possible probability of finding the desired element for any number of oracle lookups. Many examples of provable quantum speedups for query problems are based on Grover's algorithm, including Brassard, Høyer, and Tapp's algorithm for finding collisions in two-to-one functions, [83] and Farhi, Goldstone, and Gutmann's algorithm for evaluating NAND trees. [84] Problems that can be efficiently addressed with Grover's algorithm have the following properties: [85] [86] There is no searchable structure in the collection of possible answers, The number of possible answers to check is the same as the number of inputs to the algorithm, and There exists a boolean function that evaluates each input and determines whether it is the correct answer. For problems with all these properties, the running time of Grover's algorithm on a quantum computer scales as the square root of the number of inputs (or elements in the database), as opposed to the linear scaling of classical algorithms. A general class of problems to which Grover's algorithm can be applied [87] is a Boolean satisfiability problem , where the database through which the algorithm iterates is that of all possible answers. An example and possible application of this is a password cracker that attempts to guess a password. Breaking symmetric ciphers with this algorithm is of interest to government agencies. [88] Quantum annealing[ edit ] Quantum annealing relies on the adiabatic theorem to undertake calculations. A system is placed in the ground state for a simple Hamiltonian, which slowly evolves to a more complicated Hamiltonian whose ground state represents the solution to the problem in question. The adiabatic theorem states that if the evolution is slow enough the system will stay in its ground state at all times through the process. Adiabatic optimization may be helpful for solving computational biology problems. [89] Main article: Quantum machine learning Since quantum computers can produce outputs that classical computers cannot produce efficiently, and since quantum computation is fundamentally linear algebraic, some express hope in developing quantum algorithms that can speed up machine learning tasks. [35] [90] For example, the HHL Algorithm , named after its discoverers Harrow, Hassidim, and Lloyd, is believed to provide speedup over classical counterparts. [35] [91] Some research groups have recently explored the use of quantum annealing hardware for training Boltzmann machines and deep neural networks . [92] [93] [94] Deep generative chemistry models emerge as powerful tools to expedite drug discovery . However, the immense size and complexity of the structural space of all possible drug-like molecules pose significant obstacles, which could be overcome in the future by quantum computers. Quantum computers are naturally good for solving complex quantum many-body problems [23] and thus may be instrumental in applications involving quantum chemistry. Therefore, one can expect that quantum-enhanced generative models [95] including quantum GANs [96] may eventually be developed into ultimate generative chemistry algorithms. A wafer of adiabatic quantum computers As of 2023, [update] classical computers outperform quantum computers for all real-world applications. While current quantum computers may speed up solutions to particular mathematical problems, they give no computational advantage for practical tasks. For many tasks there is no promise of useful quantum speedup, and some tasks provably prohibit any quantum speedup in the sense that any speedup is ruled out by proven theorems. Scientists and engineers are exploring multiple technologies for quantum computing hardware and hope to develop scalable quantum architectures, but serious obstacles remain. [97] [98] Challenges[ edit ] There are a number of technical challenges in building a large-scale quantum computer. [99] Physicist David DiVincenzo has listed these requirements for a practical quantum computer: [100] Physically scalable to increase the number of qubits Qubits that can be initialized to arbitrary values Quantum gates that are faster than decoherence time Universal gate set Qubits that can be read easily. Sourcing parts for quantum computers is also very difficult. Superconducting quantum computers , like those constructed by Google and IBM , need helium-3 , a nuclear research byproduct, and special superconducting cables made only by the Japanese company Coax Co. [101] The control of multi-qubit systems requires the generation and coordination of a large number of electrical signals with tight and deterministic timing resolution. This has led to the development of quantum controllers that enable interfacing with the qubits. Scaling these systems to support a growing number of qubits is an additional challenge. [102] Decoherence[ edit ] One of the greatest challenges involved with constructing quantum computers is controlling or removing quantum decoherence . This usually means isolating the system from its environment as interactions with the external world cause the system to decohere. However, other sources of decoherence also exist. Examples include the quantum gates, and the lattice vibrations and background thermonuclear spin of the physical system used to implement the qubits. Decoherence is irreversible, as it is effectively non-unitary, and is usually something that should be highly controlled, if not avoided. Decoherence times for candidate systems in particular, the transverse relaxation time T2 (for NMR and MRI technology, also called the dephasing time), typically range between nanoseconds and seconds at low temperature. [103] Currently, some quantum computers require their qubits to be cooled to 20 millikelvin (usually using a dilution refrigerator [104] ) in order to prevent significant decoherence. [105] A 2020 study argues that ionizing radiation such as cosmic rays can nevertheless cause certain systems to decohere within milliseconds. [106] As a result, time-consuming tasks may render some quantum algorithms inoperable, as attempting to maintain the state of qubits for a long enough duration will eventually corrupt the superpositions. [107] These issues are more difficult for optical approaches as the timescales are orders of magnitude shorter and an often-cited approach to overcoming them is optical pulse shaping . Error rates are typically proportional to the ratio of operating time to decoherence time, hence any operation must be completed much more quickly than the decoherence time. As described by the threshold theorem , if the error rate is small enough, it is thought to be possible to use quantum error correction to suppress errors and decoherence. This allows the total calculation time to be longer than the decoherence time if the error correction scheme can correct errors faster than decoherence introduces them. An often-cited figure for the required error rate in each gate for fault-tolerant computation is 10−3, assuming the noise is depolarizing. Meeting this scalability condition is possible for a wide range of systems. However, the use of error correction brings with it the cost of a greatly increased number of required qubits. The number required to factor integers using Shor's algorithm is still polynomial, and thought to be between L and L2, where L is the number of digits in the number to be factored; error correction algorithms would inflate this figure by an additional factor of L. For a 1000-bit number, this implies a need for about 104 bits without error correction. [108] With error correction, the figure would rise to about 107 bits. Computation time is about L2 or about 107 steps and at 1 MHz, about 10 seconds. However, the encoding and error-correction overheads increase the size of a real fault-tolerant quantum computer by several orders of magnitude. Careful estimates [109] [110] show that at least 3 million physical qubits would factor 2,048-bit integer in 5 months on a fully error-corrected trapped-ion quantum computer. In terms of the number of physical qubits, to date, this remains the lowest estimate [111] for practically useful integer factorization problem sizing 1,024-bit or larger. Another approach to the stability-decoherence problem is to create a topological quantum computer with anyons , quasi-particles used as threads, and relying on braid theory to form stable logic gates. [112] [113] Quantum supremacy[ edit ] Physicist John Preskill coined the term quantum supremacy to describe the engineering feat of demonstrating that a programmable quantum device can solve a problem beyond the capabilities of state-of-the-art classical computers. [114] [115] [116] The problem need not be useful, so some view the quantum supremacy test only as a potential future benchmark. [117] In October 2019, Google AI Quantum, with the help of NASA, became the first to claim to have achieved quantum supremacy by performing calculations on the Sycamore quantum computer more than 3,000,000 times faster than they could be done on Summit , generally considered the world's fastest computer. [29] [118] [119] This claim has been subsequently challenged: IBM has stated that Summit can perform samples much faster than claimed, [120] [121] and researchers have since developed better algorithms for the sampling problem used to claim quantum supremacy, giving substantial reductions to the gap between Sycamore and classical supercomputers [122] [123] [124] and even beating it. [125] [126] [127] In December 2020, a group at USTC implemented a type of Boson sampling on 76 photons with a photonic quantum computer , Jiuzhang , to demonstrate quantum supremacy. [128] [129] [130] The authors claim that a classical contemporary supercomputer would require a computational time of 600 million years to generate the number of samples their quantum processor can generate in 20 seconds. [131] Claims of quantum supremacy have generated hype around quantum computing, [132] but they are based on contrived benchmark tasks that do not directly imply useful real-world applications. [97] [133] In January 2024, a study published in Physical Review Letters provided direct verification of quantum supremacy experiments by computing exact amplitudes for experimentally generated bitstrings using a new-generation Sunway supercomputer, demonstrating a significant leap in simulation capability built on a multiple-amplitude tensor network contraction algorithm. This development underscores the evolving landscape of quantum computing, highlighting both the progress and the complexities involved in validating quantum supremacy claims. [134] Skepticism[ edit ] Despite high hopes for quantum computing, significant progress in hardware, and optimism about future applications, a 2023 Nature spotlight article summarised current quantum computers as being "For now, [good for] absolutely nothing". [97] The article elaborated that quantum computers are yet to be more useful or efficient than conventional computers in any case, though it also argued that in the long term such computers are likely to be useful. A 2023 Communications of the ACM article [98] found that current quantum computing algorithms are "insufficient for practical quantum advantage without significant improvements across the software/hardware stack". It argues that the most promising candidates for achieving speedup with quantum computers are "small-data problems", for example in chemistry and materials science. However, the article also concludes that a large range of the potential applications it considered, such as machine learning, "will not achieve quantum advantage with current quantum algorithms in the foreseeable future", and it identified I/O constraints that make speedup unlikely for "big data problems, unstructured linear systems, and database search based on Grover's algorithm". This state of affairs can be traced to several current and long-term considerations. Conventional computer hardware and algorithms are not only optimized for practical tasks, but are still improving rapidly, particularly GPU accelerators. Current quantum computing hardware generates only a limited amount of entanglement before getting overwhelmed by noise. Quantum algorithms provide speedup over conventional algorithms only for some tasks, and matching these tasks with practical applications proved challenging. Some promising tasks and applications require resources far beyond those available today. [135] [136] In particular, processing large amounts of non-quantum data is a challenge for quantum computers. [98] Some promising algorithms have been "dequantized", i.e., their non-quantum analogues with similar complexity have been found. If quantum error correction is used to scale quantum computers to practical applications, its overhead may undermine speedup offered by many quantum algorithms. [98] Complexity analysis of algorithms sometimes makes abstract assumptions that do not hold in applications. For example, input data may not already be available encoded in quantum states, and "oracle functions" used in Grover's algorithm often have internal structure that can be exploited for faster algorithms. In particular, building computers with large numbers of qubits may be futile if those qubits are not connected well enough and cannot maintain sufficiently high degree of entanglement for long time. When trying to outperform conventional computers, quantum computing researchers often look for new tasks that can be solved on quantum computers, but this leaves the possibility that efficient non-quantum techniques will be developed in response, as seen for Quantum supremacy demonstrations. Therefore, it is desirable to prove lower bounds on the complexity of best possible non-quantum algorithms (which may be unknown) and show that some quantum algorithms asymptomatically improve upon those bounds. Some researchers have expressed skepticism that scalable quantum computers could ever be built, typically because of the issue of maintaining coherence at large scales, but also for other reasons. Bill Unruh doubted the practicality of quantum computers in a paper published in 1994. [137] Paul Davies argued that a 400-qubit computer would even come into conflict with the cosmological information bound implied by the holographic principle . [138] Skeptics like Gil Kalai doubt that quantum supremacy will ever be achieved. [139] [140] [141] Physicist Mikhail Dyakonov has expressed skepticism of quantum computing as follows: "So the number of continuous parameters describing the state of such a useful quantum computer at any given moment must be... about 10300... Could we ever learn to control the more than 10300 continuously variable parameters defining the quantum state of such a system? My answer is simple. No, never." [142] [143] Candidates for physical realizations[ edit ] Further information: List of proposed quantum registers This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it . (July 2023) A practical quantum computer must use a physical system as a programmable quantum register. [144] Researchers are exploring several technologies as candidates for reliable qubit implementations. [145] Superconductors and trapped ions are some of the most developed proposals, but experimentalists are considering other hardware possibilities as well. [146]
Toggle the table of contents Recycling This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 6 April 2024. Converting waste materials into new products This article is about recycling of waste materials. For recycling of waste energy, see Energy recycling . "Recycled" redirects here. For the album, see Recycled (Nektar album) . The three chasing arrows of the universal recycling symbol Municipal waste recycling rate (%), 2015 Recycling is the process of converting waste materials into new materials and objects. This concept often includes the recovery of energy from waste materials . The recyclability of a material depends on its ability to reacquire the properties it had in its original state. [1] It is an alternative to "conventional" waste disposal that can save material and help lower greenhouse gas emissions . It can also prevent the waste of potentially useful materials and reduce the consumption of fresh raw materials, reducing energy use, air pollution (from incineration ) and water pollution (from landfilling ). Recycling is a key component of modern waste reduction and is the third component of the " Reduce , Reuse , and Recycle" waste hierarchy . [2] [3] It promotes environmental sustainability by removing raw material input and redirecting waste output in the economic system. [4] There are some ISO standards related to recycling, such as ISO 15270:2008 for plastics waste and ISO 14001 :2015 for environmental management control of recycling practice. Recyclable materials include many kinds of glass, paper, cardboard, metal, plastic, tires , textiles , batteries, and electronics . The composting and other reuse of biodegradable waste —such as food and garden waste —is also a form of recycling. [5] Materials for recycling are either delivered to a household recycling center or picked up from curbside bins, then sorted, cleaned, and reprocessed into new materials for manufacturing new products. In ideal implementations, recycling a material produces a fresh supply of the same material—for example, used office paper would be converted into new office paper, and used polystyrene foam into new polystyrene. Some types of materials, such as metal cans , can be remanufactured repeatedly without losing their purity. [6] With other materials, this is often difficult or too expensive (compared with producing the same product from raw materials or other sources), so "recycling" of many products and materials involves their reuse in producing different materials (for example, paperboard ). Another form of recycling is the salvage of constituent materials from complex products, due to either their intrinsic value (such as lead from car batteries and gold from printed circuit boards ), or their hazardous nature (e.g. removal and reuse of mercury from thermometers and thermostats ). Origins[ edit ] Reusing materials has been a common practice for most of human history with recorded advocates as far back as Plato in the fourth century BC. [7] During periods when resources were scarce, archaeological studies of ancient waste dumps show less household waste (such as ash, broken tools, and pottery), implying that more waste was recycled in place of new material. [8] However, archaeological artefacts made from recyclable material, such as glass or metal, may neither be the original object nor resemble it, with the consequence that a successful ancient recycling economy can become invisible when recycling is synonymous with re-melting rather than reuse. [9] Inside a British factory, a textile worker rakes newly-made ' shoddy ' which was then combined with new wool to make new cloth In pre-industrial times, there is evidence of scrap bronze and other metals being collected in Europe and melted down for continuous reuse. [10] Paper recycling was first recorded in 1031 when Japanese shops sold repulped paper. [11] [12] In Britain dust and ash from wood and coal fires was collected by " dustmen " and downcycled as a base material for brick making. These forms of recycling were driven by the economic advantage of obtaining recycled materials instead of virgin material, and the need for waste removal in ever-more-densely populated areas. [8] In 1813, Benjamin Law developed the process of turning rags into " shoddy " and " mungo " wool in Batley, Yorkshire, which combined recycled fibers with virgin wool . [13] The West Yorkshire shoddy industry in towns such as Batley and Dewsbury lasted from the early 19th century to at least 1914. Industrialization spurred demand for affordable materials. In addition to rags, ferrous scrap metals were coveted as they were cheaper to acquire than virgin ore. Railroads purchased and sold scrap metal in the 19th century, and the growing steel and automobile industries purchased scrap in the early 20th century. Many secondary goods were collected, processed and sold by peddlers who scoured dumps and city streets for discarded machinery, pots, pans, and other sources of metal. By World War I , thousands of such peddlers roamed the streets of American cities, taking advantage of market forces to recycle post-consumer materials into industrial production. [14] Manufacturers of beverage bottles, including Schweppes , [15] began offering refundable recycling deposits in Great Britain and Ireland around 1800. An official recycling system with refundable deposits for bottles was established in Sweden in 1884, and for aluminum beverage cans in 1982; it led to recycling rates of 84–99%, depending on type. (Glass bottles can be refilled around 20 times. [16] ) British poster from World War II Poster from wartime Canada , encouraging housewives to "salvage" Remnants of iron fence bars in York Whip-Ma-Whop-Ma-Gate . Such public property fences were sawed for the iron and recycled during World War II . New chemical industries created in the late 19th century both invented new materials (e.g. Bakelite in 1907) and promised to transform valueless into valuable materials. Proverbially, you could not make a silk purse of a sow's ear —until the US firm Arthur D. Little published in 1921 "On the Making of Silk Purses from Sows' Ears", its research proving that when "chemistry puts on overalls and gets down to business [...] new values appear. New and better paths are opened to reach the goals desired." [17] Recycling—or "salvage", as it was then usually known—was a major issue for governments during World War II , where financial constraints and significant material shortages made it necessary to reuse goods and recycle materials. [18] These resource shortages caused by the world wars , and other such world-changing events, greatly encouraged recycling. [19] [18] It became necessary for most homes to recycle their waste, allowing people to make the most of what was available. Recycling household materials also meant more resources were left available for war efforts. [18] Massive government campaigns, such as the National Salvage Campaign in Britain and the Salvage for Victory campaign in the United States, occurred in every fighting nation, urging citizens to donate metal, paper, rags, and rubber as a patriotic duty. Post-World War II[ edit ] A considerable investment in recycling occurred in the 1970s due to rising energy costs. [20] Recycling aluminium uses only 5% of the energy of virgin production. Glass, paper and other metals have less dramatic but significant energy savings when recycled. [21] Although consumer electronics have been popular since the 1920s, recycling them was almost unheard of until early 1991. [22] The first electronic waste recycling scheme was implemented in Switzerland, beginning with collection of old refrigerators, then expanding to cover all devices. [23] When these programs were created, many countries could not deal with the sheer quantity of e-waste , or its hazardous nature, and began to export the problem to developing countries without enforced environmental legislation. (For example, recycling computer monitors in the United States costs 10 times more than in China.) Demand for electronic waste in Asia began to grow when scrapyards found they could extract valuable substances such as copper, silver, iron, silicon, nickel, and gold during the recycling process. [24] The 2000s saw a boom in both the sales of electronic devices and their growth as a waste stream: In 2002, e-waste grew faster than any other type of waste in the EU. [25] This spurred investment in modern automated facilities to cope with the influx, especially after strict laws were implemented in 2003. [26] As of 2014, the European Union had about 50% of world share of waste and recycling industries, with over 60,000 companies employing 500,000 people and a turnover of €24 billion. [27] EU countries are mandated to reach recycling rates of at least 50%; leading countries are already at around 65%. The overall EU average was 39% in 2013 [28] and is rising steadily, to 45% in 2015. [29] [30] In 2015, the United Nations General Assembly set 17 Sustainable Development Goals . Goal 12, Responsible Consumption and Production , specifies 11 targets "to ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns". [31] The fifth target, Target 12.5 , is defined as substantially reducing waste generation by 2030, indicated by the National Recycling Rate. In 2018, changes in the recycling industry have sparked a global "crisis". On 31 December 2017, China announced its " National Sword " policy, setting new standards for imports of recyclable material and banning materials deemed too "dirty" or "hazardous". The new policy caused drastic disruptions in the global recycling market, and reduced the prices of scrap plastic and low-grade paper. Exports of recyclable materials from G7 countries to China dropped dramatically, with many shifting to countries in southeast Asia. This generated significant concern about the recycling industry's practices and environmental sustainability . The abrupt shift caused countries to accept more materials than they could process, and raised fundamental questions about shipping waste from developed countries to countries with few environmental regulations—a practice that predated the crisis. [32] Health and environmental impact[ edit ] E-waste[ edit ] According to the WHO (2023), “Every year millions of electrical and electronic devices are discarded ... a threat to the environment and to human health if they are not treated, disposed of, and recycled appropriately. Common items ... include computers ... e-waste are recycled using environmentally unsound techniques and are likely stored in homes and warehouses, dumped, exported or recycled under inferior conditions. When e-waste is treated using inferior activities, it can release as many as 1000 different chemical substances ... including harmful neurotoxicants such as lead .” [33] Environmental impact[ edit ] Economist Steven Landsburg , author of a paper entitled "Why I Am Not an Environmentalist", [34] claimed that paper recycling actually reduces tree populations. He argues that because paper companies have incentives to replenish their forests, large demands for paper lead to large forests while reduced demand for paper leads to fewer "farmed" forests. [35] A metal scrap worker is pictured burning insulated copper wires for copper recovery at Agbogbloshie, Ghana. When foresting companies cut down trees, more are planted in their place; however, such farmed forests are inferior to natural forests in several ways. Farmed forests are not able to fix the soil as quickly as natural forests. This can cause widespread soil erosion and often requiring large amounts of fertilizer to maintain the soil, while containing little tree and wild-life biodiversity compared to virgin forests. [36] Also, the new trees planted are not as big as the trees that were cut down, and the argument that there would be "more trees" is not compelling to forestry advocates when they are counting saplings. In particular, wood from tropical rainforests is rarely harvested for paper because of their heterogeneity. [37] According to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change secretariat, the overwhelming direct cause of deforestation is subsistence farming (48% of deforestation) and commercial agriculture (32%), which is linked to food, not paper production. [38] Other non-conventional methods of material recycling, like Waste-to-Energy (WTE) systems, have garnered increased attention in the recent past due to the polarizing nature of their emissions. While viewed as a sustainable method of capturing energy from material waste feedstocks by many, others have cited numerous explanations for why the technology has not been scaled globally. [39] Supply[ edit ] For a recycling program to work, a large, stable supply of recyclable material is crucial. Three legislative options have been used to create such supplies: mandatory recycling collection, container deposit legislation , and refuse bans. Mandatory collection laws set recycling targets for cities, usually in the form that a certain percentage of a material must be diverted from the city's waste stream by a target date. The city is responsible for working to meet this target. [5] Container deposit legislation mandates refunds for the return of certain containers—typically glass, plastic and metal. When a product in such a container is purchased, a small surcharge is added that the consumer can reclaim when the container is returned to a collection point. These programs have succeeded in creating an average 80% recycling rate. [40] Despite such good results, the shift in collection costs from local government to industry and consumers has created strong opposition in some areas [5] —for example, where manufacturers bear the responsibility for recycling their products. In the European Union, the WEEE Directive requires producers of consumer electronics to reimburse the recyclers' costs. [41] An alternative way to increase the supply of recyclates is to ban the disposal of certain materials as waste, often including used oil , old batteries, tires , and garden waste. This can create a viable economy for the proper disposal of the products. Care must be taken that enough recycling services exist to meet the supply, or such bans can create increased illegal dumping . [5] Government-mandated demand[ edit ] Four forms of legislation have also been used to increase and maintain the demand for recycled materials: minimum recycled content mandates, utilization rates, procurement policies, and recycled product labeling . [5] Both minimum recycled content mandates and utilization rates increase demand by forcing manufacturers to include recycling in their operations. Content mandates specify that a certain percentage of a new product must consist of recycled material. Utilization rates are a more flexible option: Industries can meet their recycling targets at any point of their operations, or even contract out recycling in exchange for tradable credits. Opponents to these methods cite their large increase in reporting requirements, and claim that they rob the industry of flexibility. [5] [42] Governments have used their own purchasing power to increase recycling demand through "procurement policies". These policies are either "set-asides", which reserve a certain amount of spending for recycled products; or "price preference" programs that provide larger budgets when recycled items are purchased. Additional regulations can target specific cases: in the United States, for example, the Environmental Protection Agency mandates the purchase of oil, paper, tires and building insulation from recycled or re-refined sources whenever possible. [5] The final government regulation toward increased demand is recycled product labeling. When producers are required to label their packaging with the amount of recycled material it contains (including the packaging), consumers can make more educated choices. Consumers with sufficient buying power can choose more environmentally conscious options, prompting producers to increase the recycled material in their products and increase demand. Standardized recycling labeling can also have a positive effect on the supply of recyclates when it specifies how and where the product can be recycled. [5] Recyclates[ edit ] Glass recovered by crushing only one kind of beer bottle "Recyclate" is a raw material sent to and processed in a waste recycling plant or materials-recovery facility [43] so it can be used in the production of new materials and products. For example, plastic bottles can be made into plastic pellets and synthetic fabrics. [44] Quality of recyclate[ edit ] The quality of recyclates is one of the principal challenges for the success of a long-term vision of a green economy and achieving zero waste. It generally refers to how much of it is composed of target material, versus non-target material and other non-recyclable material. [45] Steel and other metals have intrinsically higher recyclate quality; it is estimated that two-thirds of all new steel comes from recycled steel. [46] Only target material is likely to be recycled, so higher amounts of non-target and non-recyclable materials can reduce the quantity of recycled products. [45] A high proportion of non-target and non-recyclable material can make it more difficult to achieve "high-quality" recycling; and if recyclate is of poor quality, it is more likely to end up being down-cycled or, in more extreme cases, sent to other recovery options or landfilled . [45] For example, to facilitate the remanufacturing of clear glass products, there are tight restrictions for colored glass entering the re-melt process. Another example is the downcycling of plastic, where products such as plastic food packaging are often downcycled into lower quality products,  and do not get recycled into the same plastic food packaging. The quality of recyclate not only supports high-quality recycling, but it can also deliver significant environmental benefits by reducing, reusing, and keeping products out of landfills. [45] High-quality recycling can support economic growth by maximizing the value of waste material. [45] Higher income levels from the sale of quality recyclates can return value significant to local governments, households and businesses. [45] Pursuing high-quality recycling can also promote consumer and business confidence in the waste and resource management sector, and may encourage investment in it. There are many actions along the recycling supply chain, each of which can affect recyclate quality. [47] Waste producers who place non-target and non-recyclable wastes in recycling collections can affect the quality of final recyclate streams, and require extra efforts to discard those materials at later stages in the recycling process. [47] Different collection systems can induce different levels of contamination. When multiple materials are collected together, extra effort is required to sort them into separate streams and can significantly reduce the quality of the final products. [47] Transportation and the compaction of materials can also make this more difficult. Despite improvements in technology and quality of recyclate, sorting facilities are still not 100% effective in separating materials. [47] When materials are stored outside, where they can become wet, can also cause problems for re-processors. Further sorting steps may be required to satisfactorily reduce the amount of non-target and non-recyclable material. [47] Recyclate Quality Action Plan (Scotland)[ edit ] Scotland's Recyclate Quality Action Plan proposes a number of actions the Scottish Government wants to take to increase the quality of materials collected for recycling and sorted at recovery facilities before it is exported or sold on the reprocessing market. [47] Its objectives are to: [48] Increase recyclate quality, and create greater transparency about it. Help those contracting with recycling facilities identify what is required of them. Ensure compliance with the Waste (Scotland) Regulations 2012. Stimulate a household market for quality recyclate. Address and reduce issues around waste shipment regulations. The plan focuses on three key areas, with 14 actions to increase the quality of materials collected, sorted and presented to the processing market in Scotland. [48] These areas are: [47] Collection systems and input contamination Sorting facilities—material sampling and transparency Material quality benchmarking and standards Recycling consumer waste[ edit ] Collection[ edit ] A three-sided bin at a railway station in Germany , intended to separate paper (left) and plastic wrappings (right) from other waste (back) A number of systems have been implemented to collect recyclates from the general waste stream, occupying different places on the spectrum of trade-off between public convenience and government ease and expense. The three main categories of collection are drop-off centers, buy-back centers and curbside collection. [5] About two-thirds of the cost of recycling is incurred in the collection phase. [49] A recycling truck collecting the contents of a recycling bin in Canberra , Australia Emptying of segregated rubbish containers in Tomaszów Mazowiecki , Poland Curbside collection encompasses many subtly different systems, which differ mostly on where in the process the recyclates are sorted and cleaned. The main categories are mixed waste collection, commingled recyclables, and source separation. [5] A waste collection vehicle generally picks up the waste. In mixed waste collection, recyclates are collected mixed with the rest of the waste, and the desired materials are sorted out and cleaned at a central sorting facility. This results in a large amount of recyclable waste (especially paper) being too soiled to reprocess, but has advantages as well: The city need not pay for the separate collection of recyclates, no public education is needed, and any changes to the recyclability of certain materials are implemented where sorting occurs. [5] In a commingled or single-stream system , recyclables are mixed but kept separate from non-recyclable waste. This greatly reduces the need for post-collection cleaning, but requires public education on what materials are recyclable. [5] [10] Source separation[ edit ] Source separation is the other extreme, where each material is cleaned and sorted prior to collection. It requires the least post-collection sorting and produces the purest recyclates. However, it incurs additional operating costs for collecting each material, and requires extensive public education to avoid recyclate contamination . [5] In Oregon , USA, Oregon DEQ surveyed multi-family property managers; about half of them reported problems, including contamination of recyclables due to trespassers such as transients gaining access to collection areas. [50] Source separation used to be the preferred method due to the high cost of sorting commingled (mixed waste) collection. However, advances in sorting technology have substantially lowered this overhead, and many areas that had developed source separation programs have switched to what is called co-mingled collection. [10] Reverse vending machine in Tomaszów Mazowiecki, Poland At buy-back centers, separated, cleaned recyclates are purchased, providing a clear incentive for use and creating a stable supply. The post-processed material can then be sold. If profitable, this conserves the emission of greenhouse gases; if unprofitable, it increases their emission. Buy-back centres generally need government subsidies to be viable. According to a 1993 report by the U.S. National Waste & Recycling Association , it costs an average $50 to process a ton of material that can be resold for $30. [5] Drop-off centers[ edit ] A drop-off center in the United Kingdom, where they are generally named Recycling Centres Drop-off centers require the waste producer to carry recyclates to a central location—either an installed or mobile collection station or the reprocessing plant itself. They are the easiest type of collection to establish but suffer from low and unpredictable throughput. Distributed recycling[ edit ] For some waste materials such as plastic, recent technical devices called recyclebots [51] enable a form of distributed recycling called DRAM ( distributed recycling additive manufacturing ). Preliminary life-cycle analysis (LCA) indicates that such distributed recycling of HDPE to make filament for 3D printers in rural regions consumes less energy than using virgin resin, or using conventional recycling processes with their associated transportation. [52] [53] Another form of distributed recycling mixes waste plastic with sand to make bricks in Africa . [54] Several studies have looked at the properties of recycled waste plastic and sand bricks. [55] [56] The composite pavers can be sold at 100% profit while employing workers at 1.5× the minimum wage in the West African region, where distributed recycling has the potential to produce 19 million pavement tiles from 28,000 tons of plastic water sachets annually in Ghana , Nigeria , and Liberia . [57] This has also been done with COVID19 masks. [58] Sorting[ edit ] Video of recycling sorting facility and processes Once commingled recyclates are collected and delivered to a materials recovery facility , the materials must be sorted. This is done in a series of stages, many of which involve automated processes, enabling a truckload of material to be fully sorted in less than an hour. [10] Some plants can now sort materials automatically; this is known as single-stream recycling . Automatic sorting may be aided by robotics and machine learning. [59] [60] In plants, a variety of materials is sorted including paper, different types of plastics, glass, metals, food scraps, and most types of batteries. [61] A 30% increase in recycling rates has been seen in areas with these plants. [62] In the US, there are over 300 materials recovery facilities. [63] Initially, commingled recyclates are removed from the collection vehicle and placed on a conveyor belt spread out in a single layer. Large pieces of corrugated fiberboard and plastic bags are removed by hand at this stage, as they can cause later machinery to jam. [10] Early sorting of recyclable materials: glass and plastic bottles in Poland . Next, automated machinery such as disk screens and air classifiers separate the recyclates by weight, splitting lighter paper and plastic from heavier glass and metal. Cardboard is removed from mixed paper, and the most common types of plastic— PET (#1) and HDPE (#2)—are collected, so these materials can be diverted into the proper collection channels. This is usually done by hand; but in some sorting centers, spectroscopic scanners are used to differentiate between types of paper and plastic based on their absorbed wavelengths. [10] Plastics tend to be incompatible with each other due to differences in chemical composition ; their polymer molecules repel each other, similar to oil and water. [64] Strong magnets are used to separate out ferrous metals such as iron, steel and tin cans . Non-ferrous metals are ejected by magnetic eddy currents : A rotating magnetic field induces an electric current around aluminum cans, creating an eddy current inside the cans that is repulsed by a large magnetic field , ejecting the cans from the stream. [10] A recycling point in New Byth , Scotland, with separate containers for paper, plastics, and differently colored glass Finally, glass is sorted according to its color: brown, amber, green, or clear. It may be sorted either by hand, [10] or by a machine that uses colored filters to detect colors. Glass fragments smaller than 10 millimetres (0.39 in) cannot be sorted automatically, and are mixed together as "glass fines". [65] In 2003, San Francisco 's Department of the Environment set a citywide goal of zero waste by 2020. [66] San Francisco's refuse hauler, Recology , operates an effective recyclables sorting facility that has helped the city reach a record-breaking landfill diversion rate of 80% as of 2021. [67] Other American cities, including Los Angeles, have achieved similar rates . Recycling industrial waste[ edit ] Mounds of shredded rubber tires ready for processing Although many government programs concentrate on recycling at home, 64% of waste in the United Kingdom is generated by industry. [68] The focus of many recycling programs in industry is their cost-effectiveness. The ubiquitous nature of cardboard packaging makes cardboard a commonly waste product recycled by companies that deal heavily in packaged goods, such as retail stores , warehouses , and goods distributors. Other industries deal in niche and specialized products, depending on the waste materials they handle. Glass, lumber, wood pulp and paper manufacturers all deal directly in commonly recycled materials; however, independent tire dealers may collect and recycle rubber tires for a profit. The waste produced from burning coal in a Coal-fired power station is often called fuel ash or fly ash in the United States . It is a very useful material and used in concrete construction. It exhibits Pozzolanic activity . [69] Levels of metals recycling are generally low. In 2010, the International Resource Panel , hosted by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), published reports on metal stocks [70] and their recycling rates. [70] It reported that the increase in the use of metals during the 20th and into the 21st century has led to a substantial shift in metal stocks from below-ground to use in above-ground applications within society. For example, in the US, in-use copper grew from 73 to 238 kg per capita between 1932–1999. The report's authors observed that, as metals are inherently recyclable, metal stocks in society can serve as huge above-ground mines (the term "urban mining" has thus been coined [71] ). However, they found that the recycling rates of many metals are low. They warned that the recycling rates of some rare metals used in applications such as mobile phones, battery packs for hybrid cars and fuel cells, are so low that unless future end-of-life recycling rates are dramatically increased, these critical metals will become unavailable for use in modern technology. The military recycles some metals. The U.S. Navy 's Ship Disposal Program uses ship breaking to reclaim the steel of old vessels. Ships may also be sunk to create artificial reefs . Uranium is a dense metal that has qualities superior to lead and titanium for many military and industrial uses. Uranium left over from processing it into nuclear weapons and fuel for nuclear reactors is called depleted uranium , and is used by all branches of the U.S. military for the development of such things as armor-piercing shells and shielding. The construction industry may recycle concrete and old road surface pavement , selling these materials for profit. Some rapidly growing industries, particularly the renewable energy and solar photovoltaic technology industries, are proactively creating recycling policies even before their waste streams have considerable volume, anticipating future demand. [72] Recycling of plastics is more difficult, as most programs are not able to reach the necessary level of quality. Recycling of PVC often results in downcycling of the material, which means only products of lower quality standard can be made with the recycled material. Further information: Wind turbine § Demolition and recycling Computer processors retrieved from waste stream E-waste is a growing problem, accounting for 20–50 million metric tons of global waste per year according to the EPA . It is also the fastest growing waste stream in the EU. [25] Many recyclers do not recycle e-waste responsibly. After the cargo barge Khian Sea dumped 14,000 metric tons of toxic ash in Haiti , the Basel Convention was formed to stem the flow of hazardous substances into poorer countries. They created the e-Stewards certification to ensure that recyclers are held to the highest standards for environmental responsibility and to help consumers identify responsible recyclers. It operates alongside other prominent legislation, such as the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive of the EU and the United States National Computer Recycling Act, to prevent poisonous chemicals from entering waterways and the atmosphere. In the recycling process, television sets, monitors, cell phones, and computers are typically tested for reuse and repaired. If broken, they may be disassembled for parts still having high value if labor is cheap enough. Other e-waste is shredded to pieces roughly 10 centimetres (3.9 in) in size and manually checked to separate toxic batteries and capacitors , which contain poisonous metals. The remaining pieces are further shredded to 10 millimetres (0.39 in) particles and passed under a magnet to remove ferrous metals. An eddy current ejects non-ferrous metals, which are sorted by density either by a centrifuge or vibrating plates. Precious metals can be dissolved in acid, sorted, and smelted into ingots. The remaining glass and plastic fractions are separated by density and sold to re-processors. Television sets and monitors must be manually disassembled to remove lead from CRTs and the mercury backlight from LCDs. [73] [74] [75] Vehicles , solar panels and wind turbines can also be recycled. They often contain rare-earth elements (REE) and/or other critical raw materials . For electric car production , large amounts of REE's are typically required. [76] Whereas many critical raw elements and REE's can be recovered, environmental engineer Phillipe Bihouix Archived 6 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine reports that recycling of indium, gallium, germanium, selenium, and tantalum is still very difficult and their recycling rates are very low. [76] Main article: Plastic recycling A container for recycling used plastic spoons into material for 3D printing Plastic recycling is the process of recovering scrap or waste plastic and reprocessing the material into useful products, sometimes completely different in form from their original state. For instance, this could mean melting down soft drink bottles and then casting them as plastic chairs and tables. [77] For some types of plastic, the same piece of plastic can only be recycled about 2–3 times before its quality decreases to the point where it can no longer be used. [6] Physical recycling[ edit ] Some plastics are remelted to form new plastic objects; for example, PET water bottles can be converted into polyester destined for clothing. A disadvantage of this type of recycling is that the molecular weight of the polymer can change further and the levels of unwanted substances in the plastic can increase with each remelt. [78] [79] A commercial-built recycling facility was sent to the International Space Station in late 2019. The facility takes in plastic waste and unneeded plastic parts and physically converts them into spools of feedstock for the space station additive manufacturing facility used for in-space 3D printing . [80] Chemical recycling[ edit ] For some polymers, it is possible to convert them back into monomers, for example, PET can be treated with an alcohol and a catalyst to form a dialkyl terephthalate. The terephthalate diester can be used with ethylene glycol to form a new polyester polymer, thus making it possible to use the pure polymer again. In 2019, Eastman Chemical Company announced initiatives of methanolysis and syngas designed to handle a greater variety of used material. [81] Waste plastic pyrolysis to fuel oil[ edit ] Another process involves the conversion of assorted polymers into petroleum by a much less precise thermal depolymerization process. Such a process would be able to accept almost any polymer or mix of polymers, including thermoset materials such as vulcanized rubber tires and the biopolymers in feathers and other agricultural waste. Like natural petroleum, the chemicals produced can be used as fuels or as feedstock. A RESEM Technology [82] plant of this type in Carthage, Missouri , US, uses turkey waste as input material. Gasification is a similar process but is not technically recycling since polymers are not likely to become the result. Plastic Pyrolysis can convert petroleum based waste streams such as plastics into quality fuels, carbons. Given below is the list of suitable plastic raw materials for pyrolysis : Mixed waste plastic from waste paper mill Multi-layered plastic Recycling loops[ edit ] Loops for production-waste, product and material recycling The (ideal) recycling process can be differentiated into three loops, one for manufacture (production-waste recycling) and two for disposal of the product (product and material recycling). [2] The product's manufacturing phase, which consists of material processing and fabrication, forms the production-waste recycling loop. Industrial waste materials are fed back into, and reused in, the same production process. The product's disposal process requires two recycling loops: product recycling and material recycling. [2] The product or product parts are reused in the product recycling phase. This happens in one of two ways: the product is used retaining the product functionality ("reuse") or the product continues to be used but with altered functionality ("further use"). [2] The product design is unmodified, or only slightly modified, in both scenarios. Product disassembly requires material recycling where product materials are recovered and recycled. Ideally, the materials are processed so they can flow back into the production process. [2] Main article: Recycling codes Recycling codes on products In order to meet recyclers' needs while providing manufacturers a consistent, uniform system, a coding system was developed. The recycling code for plastics was introduced in 1988 by the plastics industry through the Society of the Plastics Industry . [83] Because municipal recycling programs traditionally have targeted packaging—primarily bottles and containers—the resin coding system offered a means of identifying the resin content of bottles and containers commonly found in the residential waste stream. [84] In the United States, plastic products are printed with numbers 1–7 depending on the type of resin. Type 1 ( polyethylene terephthalate ) is commonly found in soft drink and water bottles . Type 2 ( high-density polyethylene ) is found in most hard plastics such as milk jugs , laundry detergent bottles, and some dishware. Type 3 ( polyvinyl chloride ) includes items such as shampoo bottles, shower curtains, hula hoops , credit cards , wire jacketing, medical equipment, siding, and piping. Type 4 ( low-density polyethylene ) is found in shopping bags, squeezable bottles, tote bags, clothing, furniture, and carpet. Type 5 is polypropylene and makes up syrup bottles, straws, Tupperware , and some automotive parts. Type 6 is polystyrene and makes up meat trays, egg cartons, clamshell containers, and compact disc cases. Type 7 includes all other plastics such as bulletproof materials, 3- and 5-gallon water bottles, cell phone and tablet frames, safety goggles and sunglasses. [85] Having a recycling code or the chasing arrows logo on a material is not an automatic indicator that a material is recyclable but rather an explanation of what the material is. Types 1 and 2 are the most commonly recycled. Cost–benefit analysis[ edit ] Environmental effects of recycling [86] Material Energy savings vs. new production Air pollution savings vs. new production 60% [10] In addition to environmental impact, there is debate over whether recycling is economically efficient . According to a Natural Resources Defense Council study, waste collection and landfill disposal creates less than one job per 1,000 tons of waste material managed; in contrast, the collection, processing, and manufacturing of recycled materials creates 6–13 or more jobs per 1,000 tons. [89] According to the U.S. Recycling Economic Informational Study, there are over 50,000 recycling establishments that have created over a million jobs in the US. [90] The National Waste & Recycling Association (NWRA) reported in May 2015 that recycling and waste made a $6.7 billion economic impact in Ohio, U.S., and employed 14,000 people. [91] Economists[ who? ] would classify this extra labor used as a cost rather than a benefit since these workers could have been employed elsewhere; the cost effectiveness of creating these additional jobs remains unclear.[ citation needed ] Sometimes cities have found recycling saves resources compared to other methods of disposal of waste. Two years after New York City declared that implementing recycling programs would be "a drain on the city", New York City leaders realized that an efficient recycling system could save the city over $20 million. [92] Municipalities often see fiscal benefits from implementing recycling programs, largely due to the reduced landfill costs. [93] A study conducted by the Technical University of Denmark according to the Economist found that in 83 percent of cases, recycling is the most efficient method to dispose of household waste. [10] [21] However, a 2004 assessment by the Danish Environmental Assessment Institute concluded that incineration was the most effective method for disposing of drink containers, even aluminium ones. [94] Fiscal efficiency is separate from economic efficiency. Economic analysis of recycling does not include what economists call externalities : unpriced costs and benefits that accrue to individuals outside of private transactions. Examples include less air pollution and greenhouse gases from incineration and less waste leaching from landfills.  Without mechanisms such as taxes or subsidies, businesses and consumers following their private benefit would ignore externalities despite the costs imposed on society. If landfills and incinerator pollution is inadequately regulated, these methods of waste disposal appear cheaper than they really are, because part of their cost is the pollution imposed on people nearby. Thus, advocates have pushed for legislation to increase demand for recycled materials. [5] The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has concluded in favor of recycling, saying that recycling efforts reduced the country's carbon emissions by a net 49 million metric tonnes in 2005. [10] In the United Kingdom, the Waste and Resources Action Programme stated that Great Britain's recycling efforts reduce CO2 emissions by 10–15 million tonnes a year. [10] The question for economic efficiency is whether this reduction is worth the extra cost of recycling and thus makes the artificial demand creates by legislation worthwhile. Wrecked automobiles gathered for smelting Certain requirements must be met for recycling to be economically feasible and environmentally effective. These include an adequate source of recyclates, a system to extract those recyclates from the waste stream , a nearby factory capable of reprocessing the recyclates, and a potential demand for the recycled products. These last two requirements are often overlooked—without both an industrial market for production using the collected materials and a consumer market for the manufactured goods, recycling is incomplete and in fact only "collection". [5] Free-market economist Julian Simon remarked "There are three ways society can organize waste disposal: (a) commanding, (b) guiding by tax and subsidy, and (c) leaving it to the individual and the market". These principles appear to divide economic thinkers today. [95] Frank Ackerman favours a high level of government intervention to provide recycling services. He believes that recycling's benefit cannot be effectively quantified by traditional laissez-faire economics. Allen Hershkowitz supports intervention, saying that it is a public service equal to education and policing. He argues that manufacturers should shoulder more of the burden of waste disposal. [95] Paul Calcott and Margaret Walls advocate the second option. A deposit refund scheme and a small refuse charge would encourage recycling but not at the expense of illegal dumping . Thomas C. Kinnaman concludes that a landfill tax would force consumers, companies and councils to recycle more. [95] Most free-market thinkers detest subsidy and intervention, arguing that they waste resources. The general argument is that if cities charge the full cost of garbage collection, private companies can profitably recycle any materials for which the benefit of recycling exceeds the cost (e.g. aluminum [96] ) and do not recycle other materials for which the benefit is less than the cost (e.g. glass [97] ). Cities, on the other hand, often recycle even when they  not only do not receive enough for the paper or plastic to pay for its collection, but must actually pay private recycling companies to take it off of their hands. [96] Terry Anderson and Donald Leal think that all recycling programmes should be privately operated, and therefore would only operate if the money saved by recycling exceeds its costs. Daniel K. Benjamin argues that it wastes people's resources and lowers the wealth of a population. [95] He notes that recycling can cost a city more than twice as much as landfills, that in the United States landfills are so heavily regulated that their pollution effects are negligible, and that the recycling process also generates pollution and uses energy, which may or may not be less than from virgin production. [98] Trade in recyclates[ edit ] Certain countries trade in unprocessed recyclates . Some have complained that the ultimate fate of recyclates sold to another country is unknown and they may end up in landfills instead of being reprocessed. According to one report, in America, 50–80 percent of computers destined for recycling are actually not recycled. [99] [100] There are reports of illegal-waste imports to China being dismantled and recycled solely for monetary gain, without consideration for workers' health or environmental damage. Although the Chinese government has banned these practices, it has not been able to eradicate them. [101] In 2008, the prices of recyclable waste plummeted before rebounding in 2009. Cardboard averaged about £53/tonne from 2004 to 2008, dropped to £19/tonne, and then went up to £59/tonne in May 2009. PET plastic averaged about £156/tonne, dropped to £75/tonne and then moved up to £195/tonne in May 2009. [102] Certain regions have difficulty using or exporting as much of a material as they recycle. This problem is most prevalent with glass: both Britain and the U.S. import large quantities of wine bottled in green glass. Though much of this glass is sent to be recycled, outside the American Midwest there is not enough wine production to use all of the reprocessed material. The extra must be downcycled into building materials or re-inserted into the regular waste stream. [5] [10] Similarly, the northwestern United States has difficulty finding markets for recycled newspaper, given the large number of pulp mills in the region as well as the proximity to Asian markets. In other areas of the U.S., however, demand for used newsprint has seen wide fluctuation. [5] In some U.S. states, a program called RecycleBank pays people to recycle, receiving money from local municipalities for the reduction in landfill space that must be purchased. It uses a single stream process in which all material is automatically sorted. [103] Criticisms and responses[ edit ] Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Critics dispute the net economic and environmental benefits of recycling over its costs, and suggest that proponents of recycling often make matters worse and suffer from confirmation bias . Specifically, critics argue that the costs and energy used in collection and transportation detract from (and outweigh) the costs and energy saved in the production process; also that the jobs produced by the recycling industry can be a poor trade for the jobs lost in logging, mining, and other industries associated with production; and that materials such as paper pulp can only be recycled a few times before material degradation prevents further recycling. [104] Journalist John Tierney notes that it is generally more expensive for municipalities to recycle waste from households than to send it to a landfill and that "recycling may be the most wasteful activity in modern America." [105] Much of the difficulty inherent in recycling comes from the fact that most products are not designed with recycling in mind. The concept of sustainable design aims to solve this problem, and was laid out in the 2002 book Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We Make Things by architect William McDonough and chemist Michael Braungart . [106] They suggest that every product (and all packaging it requires) should have a complete "closed-loop" cycle mapped out for each component—a way in which every component either returns to the natural ecosystem through biodegradation or is recycled indefinitely. [10] [107] Complete recycling is impossible from a practical standpoint. In summary, substitution and recycling strategies only delay the depletion of non-renewable stocks and therefore may buy time in the transition to true or strong sustainability , which ultimately is only guaranteed in an economy based on renewable resources. [108] : 21 M. H. Huesemann, 2003 While recycling diverts waste from entering directly into landfill sites, current recycling misses the dispersive components. Critics believe that complete recycling is impracticable as highly dispersed wastes become so diluted that the energy needed for their recovery becomes increasingly excessive. As with environmental economics , care must be taken to ensure a complete view of the costs and benefits involved. For example, paperboard packaging for food products is more easily recycled than most plastic, but is heavier to ship and may result in more waste from spoilage. [109] Energy and material flows[ edit ] Bales of crushed steel ready for transport to the smelter The amount of energy saved through recycling depends upon the material being recycled and the type of energy accounting that is used. Correct accounting for this saved energy can be accomplished with life-cycle analysis using real energy values, and in addition, exergy , which is a measure of how much useful energy can be used. In general, it takes far less energy to produce a unit mass of recycled materials than it does to make the same mass of virgin materials. [110] [111] [112] Some scholars use emergy (spelled with an m) analysis, for example, budgets for the amount of energy of one kind (exergy) that is required to make or transform things into another kind of product or service. Emergy calculations take into account economics that can alter pure physics-based results. Using emergy life-cycle analysis researchers have concluded that materials with large refining costs have the greatest potential for high recycle benefits. Moreover, the highest emergy efficiency accrues from systems geared toward material recycling, where materials are engineered to recycle back into their original form and purpose, followed by adaptive reuse systems where the materials are recycled into a different kind of product, and then by-product reuse systems where parts of the products are used to make an entirely different product. [113] The Energy Information Administration (EIA) states on its website that "a paper mill uses 40 percent less energy to make paper from recycled paper than it does to make paper from fresh lumber." [114] Some critics argue that it takes more energy to produce recycled products than it does to dispose of them in traditional landfill methods, since the curbside collection of recyclables often requires a second waste truck. However, recycling proponents point out that a second timber or logging truck is eliminated when paper is collected for recycling, so the net energy consumption is the same. An emergy life-cycle analysis on recycling revealed that fly ash, aluminum, recycled concrete aggregate, recycled plastic, and steel yield higher efficiency ratios, whereas the recycling of lumber generates the lowest recycle benefit ratio. Hence, the specific nature of the recycling process, the methods used to analyse the process, and the products involved affect the energy savings budgets. [113] It is difficult to determine the amount of energy consumed or produced in waste disposal processes in broader ecological terms, where causal relations dissipate into complex networks of material and energy flow. [C]ities do not follow all the strategies of ecosystem development. Biogeochemical paths become fairly straight relative to wild ecosystems, with reduced recycling, resulting in large flows of waste and low total energy efficiencies. By contrast, in wild ecosystems, one population's wastes are another population's resources, and succession results in efficient exploitation of available resources. However, even modernized cities may still be in the earliest stages of a succession that may take centuries or millennia to complete. [115] : 720 How much energy is used in recycling also depends on the type of material being recycled and the process used to do so. Aluminium is generally agreed to use far less energy when recycled rather than being produced from scratch. The EPA states that "recycling aluminum cans, for example, saves 95 percent of the energy required to make the same amount of aluminum from its virgin source, bauxite ." [116] [117] In 2009, more than half of all aluminium cans produced came from recycled aluminium. [118] Similarly, it has been estimated that new steel produced with recycled cans reduces greenhouse gas emissions by 75%. [119] Every year, millions of tons of materials are being exploited from the earth's crust, and processed into consumer and capital goods. After decades to centuries, most of these materials are "lost". With the exception of some pieces of art or religious relics, they are no longer engaged in the consumption process. Where are they? Recycling is only an intermediate solution for such materials, although it does prolong the residence time in the anthroposphere. For thermodynamic reasons, however, recycling cannot prevent the final need for an ultimate sink. [120] : 1 P. H. Brunner Economist Steven Landsburg has suggested that the sole benefit of reducing landfill space is trumped by the energy needed and resulting pollution from the recycling process. [121] Others, however, have calculated through life-cycle assessment that producing recycled paper uses less energy and water than harvesting, pulping, processing, and transporting virgin trees. [122] When less recycled paper is used, additional energy is needed to create and maintain farmed forests until these forests are as self-sustainable as virgin forests. Other studies have shown that recycling in itself is inefficient to perform the "decoupling" of economic development from the depletion of non-renewable raw materials that is necessary for sustainable development. [123] The international transportation or recycle material flows through "... different trade networks of the three countries result in different flows, decay rates, and potential recycling returns". [124] : 1 As global consumption of a natural resources grows, their depletion is inevitable. The best recycling can do is to delay; complete closure of material loops to achieve 100 percent recycling of nonrenewables is impossible as micro-trace materials dissipate into the environment causing severe damage to the planet's ecosystems. [125] [126] [127] Historically, this was identified as the metabolic rift by Karl Marx , who identified the unequal exchange rate between energy and nutrients flowing from rural areas to feed urban cities that create effluent wastes degrading the planet's ecological capital, such as loss in soil nutrient production. [128] [129] Energy conservation also leads to what is known as Jevon's paradox , where improvements in energy efficiency lowers the cost of production and leads to a rebound effect where rates of consumption and economic growth increases. [127] [130] This shop in New York only sells items recycled from demolished buildings. Costs[ edit ] The amount of money actually saved through recycling depends on the efficiency of the recycling program used to do it. The Institute for Local Self-Reliance argues that the cost of recycling depends on various factors, such as landfill fees and the amount of disposal that the community recycles. It states that communities begin to save money when they treat recycling as a replacement for their traditional waste system rather than an add-on to it and by "redesigning their collection schedules and/or trucks". [131] In some cases, the cost of recyclable materials also exceeds the cost of raw materials. Virgin plastic resin costs 40 percent less than recycled resin. [114] Additionally, a United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) study that tracked the price of clear glass from 15 July to 2 August 1991, found that the average cost per ton ranged from $40 to $60 [132] while a USGS report shows that the cost per ton of raw silica sand from years 1993 to 1997 fell between $17.33 and $18.10. [133] Comparing the market cost of recyclable material with the cost of new raw materials ignores economic externalities —the costs that are currently not counted by the market. Creating a new piece of plastic, for instance, may cause more pollution and be less sustainable than recycling a similar piece of plastic, but these factors are not counted in market cost. A life cycle assessment can be used to determine the levels of externalities and decide whether the recycling may be worthwhile despite unfavorable market costs. Alternatively, legal means (such as a carbon tax ) can be used to bring externalities into the market, so that the market cost of the material becomes close to the true cost. Working conditions[ edit ] Some people in Brazil earn their living by collecting and sorting garbage and selling them for recycling. The recycling of waste electrical and electronic equipment can create a significant amount of pollution. This problem is specifically occurrent in India and China. Informal recycling in an underground economy of these countries has generated an environmental and health disaster. High levels of lead (Pb), polybrominated diphenylethers (PBDEs), polychlorinated dioxins and furans , as well as polybrominated dioxins and furans (PCDD/Fs and PBDD/Fs), concentrated in the air, bottom ash , dust, soil, water, and sediments in areas surrounding recycling sites. [134] These materials can make work sites harmful to the workers themselves and the surrounding environment. Possible income loss and social costs[ edit ] In some countries, recycling is performed by the entrepreneurial poor such as the karung guni , zabbaleen , the rag-and-bone man , waste picker , and junk man . With the creation of large recycling organizations that may be profitable, either by law or economies of scale , [135] [136] the poor are more likely to be driven out of the recycling and the remanufacturing job market. To compensate for this loss of income, a society may need to create additional forms of societal programs to help support the poor. [137] Like the parable of the broken window , there is a net loss to the poor and possibly the whole of a society to make recycling artificially profitable, e.g. through the law. However, in Brazil and Argentina, waste pickers/informal recyclers work alongside the authorities, in fully or semi-funded cooperatives, allowing informal recycling to be legitimized as a paid public sector job. [138] Because the social support of a country is likely to be less than the loss of income to the poor undertaking recycling, there is a greater chance for the poor to come in conflict with the large recycling organizations. [139] [140] This means fewer people can decide if certain waste is more economically reusable in its current form rather than being reprocessed. Contrasted to the recycling poor, the efficiency of their recycling may actually be higher for some materials because individuals have greater control over what is considered "waste". [137] One labor-intensive underused waste is electronic and computer waste. Because this waste may still be functional and wanted mostly by those on lower incomes, who may sell or use it at a greater efficiency than large recyclers. Some recycling advocates believe that laissez-faire individual-based recycling does not cover all of society's recycling needs. Thus, it does not negate the need for an organized recycling program. [137] Local government can consider the activities of the recycling poor as contributing to the ruining of property. Public participation rates[ edit ] Single-stream recycling increases public participation rates, but requires additional sorting. Better recycling is a priority in the European Union, especially in Central and Eastern Europe among respondents of the 2020-21 European Investment Bank Climate Survey. Changes that have been demonstrated to increase recycling rates include: Pay as you throw fees for trash In a study done by social psychologist Shawn Burn, [141] it was found that personal contact with individuals within a neighborhood is the most effective way to increase recycling within a community. In her study, she had 10 block leaders talk to their neighbors and persuade them to recycle. A comparison group was sent fliers promoting recycling. It was found that the neighbors that were personally contacted by their block leaders recycled much more than the group without personal contact. As a result of this study, Shawn Burn believes that personal contact within a small group of people is an important factor in encouraging recycling. Another study done by Stuart Oskamp [142] examines the effect of neighbors and friends on recycling. It was found in his studies that people who had friends and neighbors that recycled were much more likely to also recycle than those who did not have friends and neighbors that recycled. Many schools have created recycling awareness clubs in order to give young students an insight on recycling. These schools believe that the clubs actually encourage students to not only recycle at school but at home as well. Recycling of metals varies extremely by type. Titanium and lead have an extremely high recycling rates of over 90%. Copper and cobalt have high rates of recycling around 75%. Only about half of aluminum is recycled. Most of the remaining metals have recycling rates of below 35%, while 34 types of metals have recycling rates of under 1%. [143] "Between 1960 and 2000, the world production of plastic resins increased 25 times its original amount, while recovery of the material remained below 5 percent." [144] : 131 Many studies have addressed recycling behaviour and strategies to encourage community involvement in recycling programs. It has been argued [145] that recycling behavior is not natural because it requires a focus and appreciation for long-term planning, whereas humans have evolved to be sensitive to short-term survival goals; and that to overcome this innate predisposition, the best solution would be to use social pressure to compel participation in recycling programs. However, recent studies have concluded that social pressure does not work in this context. [146] One reason for this is that social pressure functions well in small group sizes of 50 to 150 individuals (common to nomadic hunter–gatherer peoples) but not in communities numbering in the millions, as we see today. Another reason is that individual recycling does not take place in the public view. Following the increasing popularity of recycling collection being sent to the same landfills as trash, some people kept on putting recyclables on the recyclables bin. [147] Recycling in art[ edit ] A survey showing the share of firms taking action by recycling and waste minimisation Uniseafish – made of recycled aluminum beer cans Art objects are more and more often made from recycled material. Embracing a Circular Economy through Advanced Sorting Technologies[ edit ] By extending the lifespan of goods, parts, and materials, a circular economy seeks to minimize waste and maximize resource utilization. [148] Advanced sorting techniques like optical and robotic sorting may separate and recover valuable materials from waste streams, lowering the requirement for virgin resources and accelerating the shift to a circular economy. Community engagement, such as education and awareness campaigns, may support the acceptance of recycling and reuse programs and encourage the usage of sustainable practices. One can lessen our influence on the environment, save natural resources, and generate economic possibilities by adopting a circular economy using cutting-edge sorting technology and community engagement. According to Melati et al., [149] to successfully transition to a circular economy, legislative and regulatory frameworks must encourage sustainable practices while addressing possible obstacles and difficulties in putting these ideas into action.
Toggle the table of contents Electric vehicle From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Vehicle propelled by one or more electric motors This article is about all types of electric transportation vehicles. For electric automobiles, see Electric car . This article duplicates the scope of other articles, specifically Electric car . Please discuss this issue and help introduce a summary style to the article. (March 2024) An electric vehicle (EV) is a vehicle that uses one or more electric motors for propulsion . The vehicle can be powered by a collector system , with electricity from extravehicular sources, or can be powered autonomously by a battery or by converting fuel to electricity using a generator or fuel cells . [1] EVs include road and rail vehicles , electric boats and underwater vessels , electric aircraft and electric spacecraft . Electric vehicles around the world (left to right, from top): Battery electric bus , a BYD bus in Landskrona , Sweden E-bike , a Geero, with the removable battery integrated into the down tube. Electric cart , an Italcar Attiva C2S.4 Early electric vehicles first came into existence in the late 19th century, when the Second Industrial Revolution brought forth electrification . Using electricity was among the preferred methods for motor vehicle propulsion as it provides a level of quietness, comfort and ease of operation that could not be achieved by the gasoline engine cars of the time, but range anxiety due to the limited energy storage offered by contemporary battery technologies hindered any mass adoption of private electric vehicles throughout the 20th century. Internal combustion engines (both gasoline and diesel engines ) were the dominant propulsion mechanisms for cars and trucks for about 100 years, but electricity-powered locomotion remained commonplace in other vehicle types, such as overhead line -powered mass transit vehicles like electric trains , trams , monorails and trolley buses , as well as various small, low-speed, short-range battery-powered personal vehicles such as mobility scooters . Hybrid electric vehicles , where electric motors are used as a supplementary propulsion to internal combustion engines, became more widespread in the late 1990s. Plug-in hybrid electric vehicles , where electric motors can be used as the predominant propulsion rather than a supplement, did not see any mass production until the late 2000s, and battery electric cars did not become practical options for the consumer market until the 2010s. A subtopic of sustainability e Progress in batteries, electric motors and power electronics have made electric cars more feasible than during the 20th century. As a means of reducing tailpipe emissions of carbon dioxide and other pollutants, and to reduce use of fossil fuels, government incentives are available in many areas to promote the adoption of electric cars and trucks. Main article: History of the electric vehicle Electric motive power started in 1827 when Hungarian priest Ányos Jedlik built the first crude but viable electric motor; the next year he used it to power a small model car. [2] In 1835, professor Sibrandus Stratingh of the University of Groningen , in the Netherlands , built a small-scale electric car, and sometime between 1832 and 1839, Robert Anderson of Scotland invented the first crude electric carriage, powered by non-rechargeable primary cells . [3] American blacksmith and inventor Thomas Davenport built a toy electric locomotive, powered by a primitive electric motor, in 1835. In 1838, a Scotsman named Robert Davidson built an electric locomotive that attained a speed of four miles per hour (6 km/h). In England, a patent was granted in 1840 for the use of rails as conductors of electric current, and similar American patents were issued to Lilley and Colten in 1847. [4] Thomas Edison and George Meister in a Studebaker electric runabout, 1909 The first mass-produced electric vehicles appeared in America in the early 1900s. In 1902, the Studebaker Automobile Company entered the automotive business with electric vehicles, though it also entered the gasoline vehicles market in 1904. However, with the advent of cheap assembly line cars by Ford Motor Company , the popularity of electric cars declined significantly. [5] Due to lack of electricity grids [6] and the limitations of storage batteries at that time, electric cars did not gain much popularity; however, electric trains gained immense popularity due to their economies and achievable speeds. By the 20th century, electric rail transport became commonplace due to advances in the development of electric locomotives . Over time their general-purpose commercial use reduced to specialist roles as platform trucks , forklift trucks , ambulances, [7] tow tractors, and urban delivery vehicles, such as the iconic British milk float . For most of the 20th century, the UK was the world's largest user of electric road vehicles. [8] Electrified trains were used for coal transport, as the motors did not use the valuable oxygen in the mines. Switzerland's lack of natural fossil resources forced the rapid electrification of their rail network . One of the earliest rechargeable batteries – the nickel-iron battery – was favored by Edison for use in electric cars. EVs were among the earliest automobiles, and before the preeminence of light, powerful internal combustion engines (ICEs), electric automobiles held many vehicle land speed and distance records in the early 1900s. They were produced by Baker Electric , Columbia Electric , Detroit Electric , and others, and at one point in history outsold gasoline-powered vehicles. In 1900, 28 percent of the cars on the road in the US were electric. EVs were so popular that even President Woodrow Wilson and his secret service agents toured Washington, D.C., in their Milburn Electrics, which covered 60–70 miles (100–110 km) per charge. [9] A charging station in Seattle shows an AMC Gremlin , modified to take electric power; it had a range of about 50 miles (80 km) on one charge, 1973 Most producers of passenger cars opted for gasoline cars in the first decade of the 20th century, but electric trucks were an established niche well into the 1920s. [10] [11] [6] A number of developments contributed to a decline in the popularity of electric cars. [12] Improved road infrastructure required a greater range than that offered by electric cars, and the discovery of large reserves of petroleum in Texas, Oklahoma, and California led to the wide availability of affordable gasoline/petrol, making internal combustion powered cars cheaper to operate over long distances. [13] Electric vehicles were not seldom marketed as a women's luxury car, which may have been a stigma among male consumers. [14] Also, internal combustion powered cars became ever-easier to operate thanks to the invention of the electric starter by Charles Kettering in 1912, [15] which eliminated the need of a hand crank for starting a gasoline engine, and the noise emitted by ICE cars became more bearable thanks to the use of the muffler , which Hiram Percy Maxim had invented in 1897. As roads were improved outside urban areas, electric vehicle range could not compete with the ICE. Finally, the initiation of mass production of gasoline-powered vehicles by Henry Ford in 1913 reduced significantly the cost of gasoline cars as compared to electric cars. [16] In the 1930s, National City Lines , which was a partnership of General Motors , Firestone , and Standard Oil of California purchased many electric tram networks across the country to dismantle them and replace them with GM buses. The partnership was convicted of conspiring to monopolize the sale of equipment and supplies to their subsidiary companies, but was acquitted of conspiring to monopolize the provision of transportation services. The Copenhagen Summit , which was conducted in the midst of a severe observable climate change brought on by human-made greenhouse gas emissions, was held in 2009. During the summit, more than 70 countries developed plans to eventually reach net zero. For many countries, adopting more EVs will help reduce the use of gasoline. [17] General Motors EV1 electric car (1996–1998), a subject of the film Who Killed the Electric Car? In January 1990, General Motors President introduced its EV concept two-seater, the "Impact", at the Los Angeles Auto Show. That September, the California Air Resources Board mandated major-automaker sales of EVs, in phases starting in 1998. From 1996 to 1998 GM produced 1117 EV1s , 800 of which were made available through three-year leases. [18] Chrysler, Ford, GM, Honda, and Toyota also produced limited numbers of EVs for California drivers during this time period. In 2003, upon the expiration of GM's EV1 leases, GM discontinued them. The discontinuation has variously been attributed to: the auto industry's successful federal court challenge to California's zero-emissions vehicle mandate, a federal regulation requiring GM to produce and maintain spare parts for the few thousand EV1s and the success of the oil and auto industries' media campaign to reduce public acceptance of EVs. A movie made on the subject in 2005–2006 was titled Who Killed the Electric Car? and released theatrically by Sony Pictures Classics in 2006. The film explores the roles of automobile manufacturers , oil industry , the U.S. government , batteries, hydrogen vehicles , and the general public, and each of their roles in limiting the deployment and adoption of this technology. Ford released a number of their Ford Ecostar delivery vans into the market. Honda, Nissan and Toyota also repossessed and crushed most of their EVs, which, like the GM EV1s, had been available only by closed-end lease. After public protests, Toyota sold 200 of its RAV4 EVs ; they later sold at over their original forty-thousand-dollar price. Later, BMW of Canada sold off a number of Mini EVs when their Canadian testing ended. The production of the Citroën Berlingo Electrique stopped in September 2005. Zenn started production in 2006 but ended by 2009. [19] Reintroduction[ edit ] The global stock of both plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) and battery electric vehicles (BEVs) has grown steadily since the 2010s. [20] Sales of passenger electric vehicles (EVs) indicate a trend away from gas-powered vehicles. [21] During the late 20th and early 21st century, the environmental impact of the petroleum-based transportation infrastructure, along with the fear of peak oil , led to renewed interest in electric transportation infrastructure. [22] EVs differ from fossil fuel -powered vehicles in that the electricity they consume can be generated from a wide range of sources, including fossil fuels , nuclear power , and renewables such as solar power and wind power , or any combination of those. The carbon footprint and other emissions of electric vehicles vary depending on the fuel and technology used for electricity generation . [23] [24] The electricity may be stored in the vehicle using a battery, flywheel, or supercapacitors . Vehicles using internal combustion engines usually only derive their energy from a single or a few sources, usually non-renewable fossil fuels. A key advantage of electric vehicles is regenerative braking , which recovers kinetic energy , typically lost during friction braking as heat, as electricity restored to the on-board battery. There are many ways to generate electricity, of varying costs, efficiency and ecological desirability. A passenger train, taking power through a third rail with return through the traction rails The MAZ-7907 uses an on-board generator to power in-wheel electric motors . Connection to generator plants[ edit ] Direct connection to electric grids as is common among electric trains , trams, trolleybuses , and trolleytrucks (See also: overhead lines , third rail and conduit current collection ) Online electric vehicle collects power from electric power strips buried under the road surface through electromagnetic induction Onboard generators and hybrid EVs[ edit ]
Toggle the table of contents Microscope From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific instrument This article is about microscopes, the instruments, in general. For light microscopes, see Optical microscope . For other uses, see Microscope (disambiguation) . This scientific article needs additional citations to secondary or tertiary sources such as review articles, monographs, or textbooks. Please also establish the relevance for any primary research articles cited. Unsourced or poorly sourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2017) ( Optical microscope Electron microscope A microscope (from Ancient Greek μικρός (mikrós) 'small', and σκοπέω (skopéō) 'to look (at); examine, inspect') is a laboratory instrument used to examine objects that are too small to be seen by the naked eye . Microscopy is the science of investigating small objects and structures using a microscope. Microscopic means being invisible to the eye unless aided by a microscope. There are many types of microscopes, and they may be grouped in different ways. One way is to describe the method an instrument uses to interact with a sample and produce images, either by sending a beam of light or electrons through a sample in its optical path , by detecting photon emissions from a sample, or by scanning across and a short distance from the surface of a sample using a probe. The most common microscope (and the first to be invented) is the optical microscope , which uses lenses to refract visible light that passed through a thinly sectioned sample to produce an observable image. Other major types of microscopes are the fluorescence microscope , electron microscope (both the transmission electron microscope and the scanning electron microscope ) and various types of scanning probe microscopes . [1] History 18th-century microscopes from the Musée des Arts et Métiers , Paris Although objects resembling lenses date back 4,000 years and there are Greek accounts of the optical properties of water-filled spheres (5th century BC) followed by many centuries of writings on optics, the earliest known use of simple microscopes ( magnifying glasses ) dates back to the widespread use of lenses in eyeglasses in the 13th century. [2] [3] [4] The earliest known examples of compound microscopes, which combine an objective lens near the specimen with an eyepiece to view a real image , appeared in Europe around 1620. [5] The inventor is unknown, even though many claims have been made over the years. Several revolve around the spectacle-making centers in the Netherlands , including claims it was invented in 1590 by Zacharias Janssen (claim made by his son) or Zacharias' father, Hans Martens, or both, [6] [7] claims it was invented by their neighbor and rival spectacle maker, Hans Lippershey (who applied for the first telescope patent in 1608), [8] and claims it was invented by expatriate Cornelis Drebbel , who was noted to have a version in London in 1619. [9] [10] Galileo Galilei (also sometimes cited as compound microscope inventor) seems to have found after 1610 that he could close focus his telescope to view small objects and, after seeing a compound microscope built by Drebbel exhibited in Rome in 1624, built his own improved version. [11] [12] [13] Giovanni Faber coined the name microscope for the compound microscope Galileo submitted to the Accademia dei Lincei in 1625 [14] (Galileo had called it the occhiolino 'little eye'). René Descartes (Dioptrique, 1637) describes microscopes wherein a concave mirror, with its concavity towards the object, is used, in conjunction with a lens, for illuminating the object, which is mounted on a point fixing it at the focus of the mirror. [15] Rise of modern light microscopes Carl Zeiss binocular compound microscope, 1914 The first detailed account of the microscopic anatomy of organic tissue based on the use of a microscope did not appear until 1644, in Giambattista Odierna's L'occhio della mosca, or The Fly's Eye. [16] The microscope was still largely a novelty until the 1660s and 1670s when naturalists in Italy, the Netherlands and England began using them to study biology. Italian scientist Marcello Malpighi , called the father of histology by some historians of biology, began his analysis of biological structures with the lungs. The publication in 1665 of Robert Hooke 's Micrographia had a huge impact, largely because of its impressive illustrations. Hooke created tiny lenses of small glass globules made by fusing the ends of threads of spun glass. [15] A significant contribution came from Antonie van Leeuwenhoek who achieved up to 300 times magnification using a simple single lens microscope. He sandwiched a very small glass ball lens between the holes in two metal plates riveted together, and with an adjustable-by-screws needle attached to mount the specimen. [17] Then, Van Leeuwenhoek re-discovered red blood cells (after Jan Swammerdam ) and spermatozoa , and helped popularise the use of microscopes to view biological ultrastructure. On 9 October 1676, van Leeuwenhoek reported the discovery of micro-organisms. [16] The performance of a compound light microscope depends on the quality and correct use of the condensor lens system to focus light on the specimen and the objective lens to capture the light from the specimen and form an image. [5] Early instruments were limited until this principle was fully appreciated and developed from the late 19th to very early 20th century, and until electric lamps were available as light sources. In 1893 August Köhler developed a key principle of sample illumination, Köhler illumination , which is central to achieving the theoretical limits of resolution for the light microscope. This method of sample illumination produces even lighting and overcomes the limited contrast and resolution imposed by early techniques of sample illumination. Further developments in sample illumination came from the discovery of phase contrast by Frits Zernike in 1953, and differential interference contrast illumination by Georges Nomarski in 1955; both of which allow imaging of unstained, transparent samples. Electron microscopes See also: electron microscope Electron microscope constructed by Ernst Ruska in 1933 In the early 20th century a significant alternative to the light microscope was developed, an instrument that uses a beam of electrons rather than light to generate an image. The German physicist, Ernst Ruska , working with electrical engineer Max Knoll , developed the first prototype electron microscope in 1931, a transmission electron microscope (TEM). The transmission electron microscope works on similar principles to an optical microscope but uses electrons in the place of light and electromagnets in the place of glass lenses. Use of electrons, instead of light, allows for much higher resolution. Development of the transmission electron microscope was quickly followed in 1935 by the development of the scanning electron microscope by Max Knoll . [18] Although TEMs were being used for research before WWII, and became popular afterwards, the SEM was not commercially available until 1965. Transmission electron microscopes became popular following the Second World War . Ernst Ruska, working at Siemens , developed the first commercial transmission electron microscope and, in the 1950s, major scientific conferences on electron microscopy started being held. In 1965, the first commercial scanning electron microscope was developed by Professor Sir Charles Oatley and his postgraduate student Gary Stewart, and marketed by the Cambridge Instrument Company as the "Stereoscan". One of the latest discoveries made about using an electron microscope is the ability to identify a virus. [19] Since this microscope produces a visible, clear image of small organelles, in an electron microscope there is no need for reagents to see the virus or harmful cells, resulting in a more efficient way to detect pathogens. Scanning probe microscopes See also: scanning probe microscope First atomic force microscope From 1981 to 1983 Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer worked at IBM in Zürich , Switzerland to study the quantum tunnelling phenomenon. They created a practical instrument, a scanning probe microscope from quantum tunnelling theory, that read very small forces exchanged between a probe and the surface of a sample. The probe approaches the surface so closely that electrons can flow continuously between probe and sample, making a current from surface to probe. The microscope was not initially well received due to the complex nature of the underlying theoretical explanations. In 1984 Jerry Tersoff and D.R. Hamann, while at AT&T's Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey began publishing articles that tied theory to the experimental results obtained by the instrument. This was closely followed in 1985 with functioning commercial instruments, and in 1986 with Gerd Binnig, Quate, and Gerber's invention of the atomic force microscope , then Binnig's and Rohrer's Nobel Prize in Physics for the SPM. [20] New types of scanning probe microscope have continued to be developed as the ability to machine ultra-fine probes and tips has advanced. Fluorescence microscopes See also: fluorescence microscope , immunofluorescence , and confocal microscope Fluorescence microscope with the filter cube turret above the objective lenses, coupled with a camera The most recent developments in light microscope largely centre on the rise of fluorescence microscopy in biology . [21] During the last decades of the 20th century, particularly in the post- genomic era, many techniques for fluorescent staining of cellular structures were developed. [21] The main groups of techniques involve targeted chemical staining of particular cell structures, for example, the chemical compound DAPI to label DNA , use of antibodies conjugated to fluorescent reporters, see immunofluorescence , and fluorescent proteins, such as green fluorescent protein . [22] These techniques use these different fluorophores for analysis of cell structure at a molecular level in both live and fixed samples. The rise of fluorescence microscopy drove the development of a major modern microscope design, the confocal microscope . The principle was patented in 1957 by Marvin Minsky , although laser technology limited practical application of the technique. It was not until 1978 when Thomas and Christoph Cremer developed the first practical confocal laser scanning microscope and the technique rapidly gained popularity through the 1980s. Super resolution microscopes Main articles: Super-resolution microscopy and Microscopy § Sub-diffraction techniques Much current research (in the early 21st century) on optical microscope techniques is focused on development of superresolution analysis of fluorescently labelled samples. Structured illumination can improve resolution by around two to four times and techniques like stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy are approaching the resolution of electron microscopes. [23] This occurs because the diffraction limit is occurred from light or excitation, which makes the resolution must be doubled to become super saturated. Stefan Hell was awarded the 2014 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the development of the STED technique, along with Eric Betzig and William Moerner who adapted fluorescence microscopy for single-molecule visualization. [24] X-ray microscopes Main article: X-ray microscope X-ray microscopes are instruments that use electromagnetic radiation usually in the soft X-ray band to image objects. Technological advances in X-ray lens optics in the early 1970s made the instrument a viable imaging choice. [25] They are often used in tomography (see micro-computed tomography ) to produce three dimensional images of objects, including biological materials that have not been chemically fixed. Currently research is being done to improve optics for hard X-rays which have greater penetrating power. [25] Types Types of microscopes illustrated by the principles of their beam paths Evolution of spatial resolution achieved with optical, transmission (TEM) and aberration-corrected electron microscopes (ACTEM) [26] Microscopes can be separated into several different classes. One grouping is based on what interacts with the sample to generate the image, i.e., light or photons (optical microscopes), electrons (electron microscopes) or a probe (scanning probe microscopes). Alternatively, microscopes can be classified based on whether they analyze the sample via a scanning point (confocal optical microscopes, scanning electron microscopes and scanning probe microscopes) or analyze the sample all at once (wide field optical microscopes and transmission electron microscopes). Wide field optical microscopes and transmission electron microscopes both use the theory of lenses ( optics for light microscopes and electromagnet lenses for electron microscopes) in order to magnify the image generated by the passage of a wave transmitted through the sample, or reflected by the sample. The waves used are electromagnetic (in optical microscopes ) or electron beams (in electron microscopes ). Resolution in these microscopes is limited by the wavelength of the radiation used to image the sample, where shorter wavelengths allow for a higher resolution. [21] Scanning optical and electron microscopes, like the confocal microscope and scanning electron microscope, use lenses to focus a spot of light or electrons onto the sample then analyze the signals generated by the beam interacting with the sample. The point is then scanned over the sample to analyze a rectangular region. Magnification of the image is achieved by displaying the data from scanning a physically small sample area on a relatively large screen. These microscopes have the same resolution limit as wide field optical, probe, and electron microscopes. Scanning probe microscopes also analyze a single point in the sample and then scan the probe over a rectangular sample region to build up an image. As these microscopes do not use electromagnetic or electron radiation for imaging they are not subject to the same resolution limit as the optical and electron microscopes described above. Optical microscope Main articles: Optical microscope , Digital microscope , and USB microscope The most common type of microscope (and the first invented) is the optical microscope . This is an optical instrument containing one or more lenses producing an enlarged image of a sample placed in the focal plane. Optical microscopes have refractive glass (occasionally plastic or quartz ), to focus light on the eye or on to another light detector. Mirror-based optical microscopes operate in the same manner. Typical magnification of a light microscope, assuming visible range light, is up to 1,250× with a theoretical resolution limit of around 0.250 micrometres or 250 nanometres . [21] This limits practical magnification to ~1,500×. Specialized techniques (e.g., scanning confocal microscopy , Vertico SMI ) may exceed this magnification but the resolution is diffraction limited. The use of shorter wavelengths of light, such as ultraviolet, is one way to improve the spatial resolution of the optical microscope, as are devices such as the near-field scanning optical microscope . Sarfus is a recent optical technique that increases the sensitivity of a standard optical microscope to a point where it is possible to directly visualize nanometric films (down to 0.3 nanometre) and isolated nano-objects (down to 2 nm-diameter). The technique is based on the use of non-reflecting substrates for cross-polarized reflected light microscopy. Ultraviolet light enables the resolution of microscopic features as well as the imaging of samples that are transparent to the eye. Near infrared light can be used to visualize circuitry embedded in bonded silicon devices, since silicon is transparent in this region of wavelengths. In fluorescence microscopy many wavelengths of light ranging from the ultraviolet to the visible can be used to cause samples to fluoresce , which allows viewing by eye or with specifically sensitive cameras. Unstained cells viewed by typical brightfield (left) compared to phase-contrast microscopy (right) Phase-contrast microscopy is an optical microscopic illumination technique in which small phase shifts in the light passing through a transparent specimen are converted into amplitude or contrast changes in the image. [21] The use of phase contrast does not require staining to view the slide. This microscope technique made it possible to study the cell cycle in live cells. The traditional optical microscope has more recently evolved into the digital microscope . In addition to, or instead of, directly viewing the object through the eyepieces , a type of sensor similar to those used in a digital camera is used to obtain an image, which is then displayed on a computer monitor. These sensors may use CMOS or charge-coupled device (CCD) technology, depending on the application. Digital microscopy with very low light levels to avoid damage to vulnerable biological samples is available using sensitive photon-counting digital cameras. It has been demonstrated that a light source providing pairs of entangled photons may minimize the risk of damage to the most light-sensitive samples. In this application of ghost imaging to photon-sparse microscopy, the sample is illuminated with infrared photons, each of which is spatially correlated with an entangled partner in the visible band for efficient imaging by a photon-counting camera. [27] Modern transmission electron microscope
Antiquity[ edit ] The Celts settled in the Bavarian Alps , also known as Celto-Slavs or Alpines, these peoples were famed, romanticized, and subjected to ancientness. [10] Middle Ages[ edit ] In the 530s, the Merovingian dynasty incorporated the kingdom of Thuringia after their defeat by the Franks . The Baiuvarii were Frankicised a century later. [11] The Lex Thuringorum documents an upper class nobility of adalingi. [12] From about 554 to 788, the house of Agilolfing ruled the Duchy of Bavaria , ending with Tassilo III who was deposed by Charlemagne . [13] Tassilo I of Bavaria tried unsuccessfully to hold the eastern frontier against the expansion of Slavic peoples and the Pannonian Avars around 600. Garibald II seems to have achieved a balance of power between 610 and 616. [14] At Hugbert's death in 735, the duchy passed to Odilo of Bavaria from the neighboring Alemannia . Odilo issued a Lex Baiuvariorum for Bavaria, completed the process of church organization in partnership with Saint Boniface in 739, and tried to intervene in Frankish succession disputes by fighting for the claims of the Carolingian dynasty . He was defeated near Augsburg in 743 but continued to rule until his death in 748. [15] [16] Saint Boniface completed the people's conversion to Christianity in the early 8th century. Tassilo III of Bavaria succeeded to rule Bavaria. He initially ruled under Frankish oversight but began to function independently from 763 onward. He was particularly noted for founding new monasteries and for expanding eastwards, oppressing Slavs in the eastern Alps and along the Danube and colonizing these lands. After 781, however, Charlemagne began to exert pressure and Tassilo III was deposed in 788. Dissenters attempted a coup against Charlemagne at Regensburg in 792, led by Pepin the Hunchback . A map of Bavaria in the 10th century With the revolt of Henry II, Duke of Bavaria in 976, Bavaria lost large territories in the south and southeast. One of the most important dukes of Bavaria was Henry the Lion of the house of Welf , founder of Munich , and de facto the second most powerful man in the empire as the ruler of two duchies. When in 1180, Henry the Lion was deposed as Duke of Saxony and Bavaria by his cousin, Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor (a.k.a. "Barbarossa" for his red beard), Bavaria was awarded as fief to the Wittelsbach family, counts palatinate of Schyren ("Scheyern" in modern German). They ruled for 738 years, from 1180 to 1918. In 1180, however, Styria was also separated from Bavaria. The Electorate of the Palatinate by Rhine (Kurpfalz in German) was also acquired by the House of Wittelsbach in 1214, which they would subsequently hold for six centuries. [17] The first of several divisions of the duchy of Bavaria occurred in 1255. With the extinction of the Hohenstaufen in 1268, Swabian territories were acquired by the Wittelsbach dukes. Emperor Louis the Bavarian acquired Brandenburg , Tyrol , Holland and Hainaut for his House but released the Upper Palatinate for the Palatinate branch of the Wittelsbach in 1329. That time also Salzburg finally became independent from the Duchy of Bavaria . In the 14th and 15th centuries, upper and lower Bavaria were repeatedly subdivided. Four Duchies existed after the division of 1392: Bavaria-Straubing , Bavaria-Landshut , Bavaria-Ingolstadt and Bavaria-Munich . In 1506 with the Landshut War of Succession , the other parts of Bavaria were reunited, and Munich became the sole capital. The country became a center of the Jesuit-inspired Counter-Reformation . Electorate of Bavaria[ edit ] Further information: Electorate of Bavaria In 1623, the Bavarian duke replaced his relative of the Palatinate branch, the Electorate of the Palatinate in the early days of the Thirty Years' War and acquired the powerful prince-elector dignity in the Holy Roman Empire , determining its Emperor thence forward, as well as special legal status under the empire's laws. During the early and mid-18th century the ambitions of the Bavarian prince electors led to several wars with Austria as well as occupations by Austria ( War of the Spanish Succession , War of the Austrian Succession with the election of a Wittelsbach emperor instead of a Habsburg).[ citation needed ] To mark the unification of Bavaria and the Electoral Palatinate , both being principal Wittelsbach territories, Maximilian III Joseph, Elector of Bavaria was crowned king of Bavaria. King Maximilian III Joseph was quick to change the coat of arms. The various heraldic symbols were replaced and a classical Wittelsbach pattern introduced. The white and blue lozenges symbolized the unity of the territories within the Bavarian kingdom. [18] The new state also comprised the Duchy of Jülich and Berg as these on their part were in personal union with the Palatinate.[ citation needed ] Kingdom of Bavaria[ edit ] Main article: Kingdom of Bavaria A map of Bavaria in the 19th century When Napoleon abolished the Holy Roman Empire , Bavaria became a kingdom in 1806 and joined the Confederation of the Rhine . [19] The Duchy of Jülich was ceded to France and the Electoral Palatinate was divided between France and the Grand Duchy of Baden . The Duchy of Berg was given to Joachim Murat . The County of Tyrol and the federal state of Salzburg were temporarily reunited with Bavaria but finally ceded to Austria at the Congress of Vienna . In return, Bavaria was allowed to annex the modern-day region of Palatinate to the west of the Rhine and Franconia in 1815. Between 1799 and 1817, the leading minister, Count Montgelas , followed a strict policy of modernization copying Napoleonic France; he laid the foundations of centralized administrative structures that survived the monarchy and, in part, have retained core validity through to the 21st century. In May 1808, a first constitution was passed by Maximilian I , [20] being modernized in 1818. This second version established a bicameral Parliament with a House of Lords (Kammer der Reichsräte) and a House of Commons (Kammer der Abgeordneten). That constitution was followed until the collapse of the monarchy at the end of World War I . After the rise of Prussia in the early 18th century, Bavaria preserved its independence by playing off the rivalry of Prussia and Austria . Allied to Austria, it was defeated along with Austria in the 1866 Austro-Prussian War and was not incorporated into the North German Confederation of 1867, but the question of German unity was still alive. When France declared war on Prussia in 1870 , all the south German states (Baden, Württemberg, Hessen-Darmstadt and Bavaria) aside from Austria, joined the Prussian forces and ultimately joined the Federation, which was renamed Deutsches Reich ( German Empire ) in 1871. Bavaria continued formally as a monarchy, and it had some special rights within the federation (such as an army, railways, postal service and a diplomatic body of its own) but the diplomatic body were later undone by Wilhelm II who declared them illegal and abolished the diplomatic service.[ citation needed ] Part of the German Empire[ edit ] A map of Bavaria in the German Empire , which was formed in 1871 and endured until 1918 When Bavaria became part of the newly formed German Empire , this action was considered controversial by Bavarian nationalists who had wanted to retain independence from the rest of Germany, as had Austria. As Bavaria had a heavily Catholic majority population, many people resented being ruled by the mostly Protestant northerners in Prussia . As a direct result of the Bavarian-Prussian feud, political parties formed to encourage Bavaria to break away and regain its independence. [21] In the early 20th century, Wassily Kandinsky , Paul Klee , Henrik Ibsen , and other artists were drawn to Bavaria, especially to the Schwabing district in Munich, a center of international artistic activity at the time. Free State of Bavaria[ edit ] Free State has been an adopted designation after the abolition of monarchy in the aftermath of World War I in several German states. A memorial to soldiers who died in World War I and World War II in Kröning , Bavaria On 12 November 1918, Ludwig III signed a document, the Anif declaration , releasing both civil and military officers from their oaths; the newly formed republican government , or "People's State" of Socialist premier Kurt Eisner , [22] interpreted this as an abdication. To date, however, no member of the House of Wittelsbach has ever formally declared renunciation of the throne. [23] On the other hand, none has ever since officially called upon their Bavarian or Stuart claims. Family members are active in cultural and social life, including the head of the house, Franz, Duke of Bavaria . They step back from any announcements on public affairs, showing approval or disapproval solely by Franz's presence or absence. Eisner was assassinated in February 1919, ultimately leading to a Communist revolt and the short-lived Bavarian Soviet Republic being proclaimed 6 April 1919. After violent suppression by elements of the German Army and notably the Freikorps , the Bavarian Soviet Republic fell in May 1919. The Bamberg Constitution (Bamberger Verfassung) was enacted on 12 or 14 August 1919 and came into force on 15 September 1919 creating the Free State of Bavaria within the Weimar Republic . Extremist activity further increased, notably the 1923 Beer Hall Putsch led by the Nazis , and Munich and Nuremberg became seen as strongholds of Nazism during the Weimar Republic and Nazi dictatorship . However, in the crucial German federal election, March 1933 , the Nazis received less than 50% of the votes cast in Bavaria. As a manufacturing centre, Munich was heavily bombed during World War II and was occupied by United States Armed Forces , becoming a major part of the American Zone of Allied-occupied Germany , which lasted from 1945 to 1947, and then of Bizone . The Rhenish Palatinate was detached from Bavaria in 1946 and made part of the new state Rhineland-Palatinate . During the Cold War , Bavaria was part of West Germany . In 1949, the Free State of Bavaria chose not to sign the Founding Treaty (Gründungsvertrag) for the formation of the Federal Republic of Germany, opposing the division of Germany into two countries after World War II . The Bavarian Parliament did not sign the Basic Law of Germany , mainly because it was seen as not granting sufficient powers to the individual Länder (states), but at the same time decided that it would still come into force in Bavaria if two-thirds of the other Länder ratified it.  All of the other Länder ratified it, however, so it became law. [24] Bavarian identity[ edit ] Bavarians have often emphasized a separate national identity and considered themselves as "Bavarians" first, "Germans" second. [25] In the 19th-century sense, an independent Bavarian State existed from only 1806 to 1871. This feeling started to come about more strongly among Bavarians when the Kingdom of Bavaria was forced by Otto von Bismarck to join the Protestant Prussian-dominated German Empire in 1871, while the Bavarian nationalists wanted to keep Bavaria as Catholic and an independent state. Aside from the minority Bavaria Party , most Bavarians now accept Bavaria is part of Germany. [26] Another consideration is that Bavarians foster different cultural identities. Franconia in the north speaks East Franconian German . Bavarian Swabia in the south west speaks Swabian German . Altbayern , the so-called "Old Bavaria", is the regions forming the historic pentagon-shaped Bavaria before the acquisitions through the Vienna Congress. At present the districts of the Upper Palatinate, Lower and Upper Bavaria) speak Austro-Bavarian .[ citation needed ] Flags and coat of arms[ edit ] Flags[ edit ] Uniquely among German states, Bavaria has two official flags of equal status, one with a white and blue stripe, the other with white and blue diamond-shaped lozenges . Either may be used by civilians and government offices, who are free to choose between them. [27] Unofficial versions of the flag, especially a lozenge style with coat of arms, are sometimes used by civilians. Coat of arms[ edit ] The modern coat of arms of Bavaria was designed by Eduard Ege in 1946, following heraldic traditions. The Golden Lion: At the dexter chief, sable, a lion rampant Or, armed and langued gules. This represents the administrative region of Upper Palatinate. The " Franconian Rake ": At the sinister chief, per fess dancetty, gules, and argent. This represents the administrative regions of Upper, Middle and Lower Franconia. The Blue "Pantier" (mythical creature from French heraldry , sporting a flame instead of a tongue): At the dexter base, argent, a Pantier rampant azure, armed Or and langued gules. This represents the regions of Lower and Upper Bavaria. The Three Lions: At the sinister base, Or, three lions passant guardant sable, armed and langued gules. This represents Swabia. The White-And-Blue inescutcheon: The inescutcheon of white and blue fusils askance was originally the coat of arms of the Counts of Bogen, adopted in 1247 by the House of Wittelsbach. The white-and-blue fusils are indisputably the emblem of Bavaria and these arms today symbolize Bavaria as a whole. Along with the People's Crown, it is officially used as the Minor Coat of Arms. The People's Crown (Volkskrone): The coat of arms is surmounted by a crown with a golden band inset with precious stones and decorated with five ornamental leaves. This crown first appeared in the coat of arms to symbolize sovereignty of the people after the royal crown was eschewed in 1923.
e The Iron Age is the final epoch of the three historical Metal Ages , after the Copper and Bronze Ages. [1] It has also been considered as the final Age of the three-age division starting with prehistory (before recorded history) and progressing to protohistory (before written history). In this usage, it is preceded by the Stone Age (subdivided into the Paleolithic , Mesolithic and Neolithic ) and Bronze Age . These concepts originated for describing Iron Age Europe and the Ancient Near East , but they now include other parts of the Old World (the indigenous cultures of the New World did not develop an iron economy prior to AD 1500). Although meteoritic iron has been used for millennia in many regions, the beginning of the Iron Age is defined locally around the world by archaeological convention when the production of smelted iron (especially steel tools and weapons) replaces their bronze equivalents in common use. [2] In Anatolia and the Caucasus , or Southeast Europe , the Iron Age began during the late 2nd millennium BC ( c. 1300 BC). [3] In the Ancient Near East , this transition occurred simultaneously with the Bronze Age collapse , during the 12th century BC (1200–1100 BC). The technology soon spread throughout the Mediterranean Basin region and to South Asia between the 12th and 11th century BC. Its further spread to Central Asia , Eastern Europe , and Central Europe was somewhat delayed, and Northern Europe was not reached until about the start of the 5th century BC (500 BC). The Iron Age in India is stated as beginning with the ironworking Painted Grey Ware culture, dating from the 15th century BC, through to the reign of Ashoka during the 3rd century BC. The use of the term "Iron Age" in the archaeology of South, East, and Southeast Asia is more recent and less common than for Western Eurasia. Africa did not have a universal "Bronze Age", and many areas transitioned directly from stone to iron. Some archaeologists believe that iron metallurgy was developed in sub-Saharan Africa independently from Eurasia and neighbouring parts of Northeast Africa as early as 2000 BC. [4] [5] [6] The concept of the Iron Age ending with the beginning of the written historiographical record has not generalized well, as written language and steel use have developed at different times in different areas across the archaeological record. For instance, in China, written history started before iron smelting began, so the term is used infrequently for the archaeology of China. For the Ancient Near East, the establishment of the Achaemenid Empire c. 550 BC is used traditionally and still usually as an end date; later dates are considered historical by virtue of the record by Herodotus despite considerable written records now being known from well back into the Bronze Age. In Central and Western Europe, the Roman conquests of the 1st century BC serve as marking the end of the Iron Age. The Germanic Iron Age of Scandinavia is considered to end c. AD 800, with the beginning of the Viking Age . History of the concept[ edit ] The three-age method of Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages was first used for the archaeology of Europe during the first half of the 19th century, and by the latter half of the 19th century, it had been extended to the archaeology of the Ancient Near East. Its name harks back to the mythological " Ages of Man " of Hesiod . As an archaeological era, it was first introduced to Scandinavia by Christian Jürgensen Thomsen during the 1830s. By the 1860s, it was embraced as a useful division of the "earliest history of mankind" in general [7] and began to be applied in Assyriology . The development of the now-conventional periodization in the archaeology of the Ancient Near East was developed during the 1920s and 1930s. [8] Definition of "iron"[ edit ] Willamette Meteorite , the sixth largest in the world, is an iron-nickel meteorite . Meteoric iron , a natural iron–nickel alloy, was used by various ancient peoples thousands of years before the Iron Age. The earliest-known meteoric iron artifacts are nine small beads dated to 3200 BC, which were found in burials at Gerzeh , Lower Egypt , having been shaped by careful hammering. [9] [10] [11] The characteristic of an Iron Age culture is the mass production of tools and weapons made not just of found iron, but from smelted steel alloys with an added carbon content. [12] Only with the capability of the production of carbon steel does ferrous metallurgy result in tools or weapons that are harder and lighter than bronze . Smelted iron appears sporadically in the archeological record from the middle Bronze Age . Whilst terrestrial iron is abundant naturally, temperatures above 1,250 °C (2,280 °F) are required to smelt it, impractical to achieve with technology available commonly until the end of the second millennium BC. In contrast, the components of bronze —tin with a melting point of 231.9 °C (449.4 °F) and copper with a relatively moderate melting point of 1,085 °C (1,985 °F)—were within the capabilities of Neolithic kilns , which date back to 6000 BC and were able to produce temperatures greater than 900 °C (1,650 °F). [13] In addition to specially designed furnaces, ancient iron production required the development of complex procedures for the removal of impurities, the regulation of the admixture of carbon, and the invention of hot-working to achieve a useful balance of hardness and strength in steel . The use of steel has also been regulated by the economics of the metallurgical advancements. Earliest evidence[ edit ] The earliest tentative evidence for iron-making is a small number of iron fragments with the appropriate amounts of carbon admixture found in the Proto-Hittite layers at Kaman-Kalehöyük in modern-day Turkey, dated to 2200–2000 BC. Akanuma (2008) concludes that "The combination of carbon dating, archaeological context, and archaeometallurgical examination indicates that it is likely that the use of ironware made of steel had already begun in the third millennium BC in Central Anatolia". [14] Souckova-Siegolová (2001) shows that iron implements were made in Central Anatolia in very limited quantities about 1800 BC and were in general use by elites, though not by commoners, during the New Hittite Empire (≈1400–1200 BC). [15] Similarly, recent archaeological remains of iron-working in the Ganges Valley in India have been dated tentatively to 1800 BC. Tewari (2003) concludes that "knowledge of iron smelting and manufacturing of iron artifacts was well known in the Eastern Vindhyas and iron had been in use in the Central Ganga Plain, at least from the early second millennium BC". [16] By the Middle Bronze Age increasing numbers of smelted iron objects (distinguishable from meteoric iron by the lack of nickel in the product) appeared in the Middle East , Southeast Asia and South Asia . African sites are revealing dates as early as 2000–1200 BC. [17] [18] [19] [6] However, some recent studies date the inception of iron metallurgy in Africa between 3000 and 2500 BCE, with evidence existing for early iron metallurgy in parts of Nigeria, Cameroon, and Central Africa, from as early as around 2,000 BCE. The Nok culture of Nigeria may have practiced iron smelting from as early as 1000 BCE, while the nearby Djenné-Djenno culture of the Niger Valley in Mali shows evidence of iron production from c. 250 BCE. Iron technology across much of sub-Saharan Africa has an African origin dating to before 2000 BCE. These findings confirm the independent invention of iron smelting in sub-Saharan Africa. Beginning[ edit ] Copy of The Warrior of Hirschlanden (German: Krieger von Hirschlanden), a statue of a nude ithyphallic warrior made of sandstone , the oldest known Iron Age life-size anthropomorphic statue north of the Alps . Modern archaeological evidence identifies the start of large-scale global iron production about 1200 BC, marking the end of the Bronze Age . The Iron Age in Europe is often considered as a part of the Bronze Age collapse in the ancient Near East . Anthony Snodgrass [20] [21] suggests that a shortage of tin and trade disruptions in the Mediterranean about 1300 BC forced metalworkers to seek an alternative to bronze. Many bronze implements were recycled into weapons during that time, and more widespread use of iron resulted in improved steel-making technology and lower costs. When tin became readily available again, iron was cheaper, stronger and lighter, and forged iron implements superseded cast bronze tools permanently. [22] In Central and Western Europe, the Iron Age lasted from c. 800 BC to c. 1 BC, beginning in pre-Roman Iron Age Northern Europe in c. 600 BC, and reaching Northern Scandinavian Europe about c. 500 BC. The Iron Age in the Ancient Near East is considered to last from c. 1200 BC (the Bronze Age collapse ) to c. 550 BC (or 539 BC ), roughly the beginning of historiography with Herodotus , marking the end of the proto-historical period. In China , because writing was developed first, there is no recognizable prehistoric period characterized by ironworking, and the Bronze Age China transitions almost directly into the Qin dynasty of imperial China. "Iron Age" in the context of China is used sometimes for the transitional period of c. 900 BC to 100 BC during which ferrous metallurgy was present even if not dominant. Ancient Near East[ edit ] The Iron Age in the Ancient Near East is believed to have begun after the discovery of iron smelting and smithing techniques in Anatolia , the Caucasus or Southeast Europe during the late 2nd millennium BC ( c. 1300 BC). [3] The earliest bloomery smelting of iron is found at Tell Hammeh , Jordan about 930 BC (determined from 14C dating ). The Early Iron Age in the Caucasus area is divided conventionally into two periods, Early Iron I, dated to about 1100 BC, and the Early Iron II phase from the tenth to ninth centuries BC. Many of the material culture traditions of the Late Bronze Age continued into the Early Iron Age. Thus, there is a sociocultural continuity during this transitional period. [23] In Iran, the earliest actual iron artifacts were unknown until the 9th century BC. [24] For Iran, the best studied archaeological site during this time period is Teppe Hasanlu . West Asia[ edit ] In the Mesopotamian states of Sumer , Akkad and Assyria , the initial use of iron reaches far back, to perhaps 3000 BC. [25] [ not specific enough to verify ] One of the earliest smelted iron artifacts known is a dagger with an iron blade found in a Hattic tomb in Anatolia , dating from 2500 BC. [26] The widespread use of iron weapons which replaced bronze weapons rapidly disseminated throughout the Near East (North Africa, southwest Asia ) by the beginning of the 1st millennium BC. The development of iron smelting was once attributed to the Hittites of Anatolia during the Late Bronze Age.  As part of the Late Bronze Age-Early Iron Age, the Bronze Age collapse saw the slow, comparatively continuous spread of iron-working technology in the region. It was long believed that the success of the Hittite Empire during the Late Bronze Age had been based on the advantages entailed by the "monopoly" on ironworking at the time. [27] Accordingly, the invading Sea Peoples would have been responsible for spreading the knowledge through that region. The idea of such a "Hittite monopoly" has been examined more thoroughly and no longer represents a scholarly consensus. [27] While there are some iron objects from Bronze Age Anatolia, the number is comparable to iron objects found in Egypt and other places of the same time period; and only a small number of these objects are weapons. [28] Early examples and distribution of non-precious metal finds [29] [ self-published source ] Date
Divine Comedy : Dante and Beatrice see God as a point of light. In many languages, including Arabic and modern European languages, poets use rhyme in set patterns as a structural element for specific poetic forms, such as ballads , sonnets and rhyming couplets . However, the use of structural rhyme is not universal even within the European tradition. Much modern poetry avoids traditional rhyme schemes . Classical Greek and Latin poetry did not use rhyme. [77] Rhyme entered European poetry in the High Middle Ages , due to the influence of the Arabic language in Al Andalus . [78] Arabic language poets used rhyme extensively not only with the development of literary Arabic in the sixth century , but also with the much older oral poetry, as in their long, rhyming qasidas . [79] Some rhyming schemes have become associated with a specific language, culture or period, while other rhyming schemes have achieved use across languages, cultures or time periods. Some forms of poetry carry a consistent and well-defined rhyming scheme, such as the chant royal or the rubaiyat , while other poetic forms have variable rhyme schemes. [80] Most rhyme schemes are described using letters that correspond to sets of rhymes, so if the first, second and fourth lines of a quatrain rhyme with each other and the third line do not rhyme, the quatrain is said to have an AA BA rhyme scheme . This rhyme scheme is the one used, for example, in the rubaiyat form. [81] Similarly, an A BB A quatrain (what is known as " enclosed rhyme ") is used in such forms as the Petrarchan sonnet . [82] Some types of more complicated rhyming schemes have developed names of their own, separate from the "a-bc" convention, such as the ottava rima and terza rima . [83] The types and use of differing rhyming schemes are discussed further in the main article . Form in poetry[ edit ] Poetic form is more flexible in modernist and post-modernist poetry and continues to be less structured than in previous literary eras. Many modern poets eschew recognizable structures or forms and write in free verse . Free verse is, however, not "formless" but composed of a series of more subtle, more flexible prosodic elements. [84] Thus poetry remains, in all its styles, distinguished from prose by form; [85] some regard for basic formal structures of poetry will be found in all varieties of free verse, however much such structures may appear to have been ignored. [86] Similarly, in the best poetry written in classic styles there will be departures from strict form for emphasis or effect. [87] Among major structural elements used in poetry are the line, the stanza or verse paragraph , and larger combinations of stanzas or lines such as cantos . Also sometimes used are broader visual presentations of words and calligraphy . These basic units of poetic form are often combined into larger structures, called poetic forms or poetic modes (see the following section), as in the sonnet . Lines and stanzas[ edit ] Main articles: Line (poetry) and Stanza Poetry is often separated into lines on a page, in a process known as lineation . These lines may be based on the number of metrical feet or may emphasize a rhyming pattern at the ends of lines. Lines may serve other functions, particularly where the poem is not written in a formal metrical pattern. Lines can separate, compare or contrast thoughts expressed in different units, or can highlight a change in tone. [88] See the article on line breaks for information about the division between lines. Lines of poems are often organized into stanzas , which are denominated by the number of lines included. Thus a collection of two lines is a couplet (or distich ), three lines a triplet (or tercet ), four lines a quatrain , and so on. These lines may or may not relate to each other by rhyme or rhythm. For example, a couplet may be two lines with identical meters which rhyme or two lines held together by a common meter alone. [89] Blok 's Russian poem, "Noch, ulitsa, fonar, apteka" ("Night, street, lamp, drugstore"), on a wall in Leiden Other poems may be organized into verse paragraphs , in which regular rhymes with established rhythms are not used, but the poetic tone is instead established by a collection of rhythms, alliterations, and rhymes established in paragraph form. [90] Many medieval poems were written in verse paragraphs, even where regular rhymes and rhythms were used. [91] In many forms of poetry, stanzas are interlocking, so that the rhyming scheme or other structural elements of one stanza determine those of succeeding stanzas. Examples of such interlocking stanzas include, for example, the ghazal and the villanelle , where a refrain (or, in the case of the villanelle, refrains) is established in the first stanza which then repeats in subsequent stanzas. Related to the use of interlocking stanzas is their use to separate thematic parts of a poem. For example, the strophe , antistrophe and epode of the ode form are often separated into one or more stanzas. [92] In some cases, particularly lengthier formal poetry such as some forms of epic poetry, stanzas themselves are constructed according to strict rules and then combined. In skaldic poetry, the dróttkvætt stanza had eight lines, each having three "lifts" produced with alliteration or assonance. In addition to two or three alliterations, the odd-numbered lines had partial rhyme of consonants with dissimilar vowels, not necessarily at the beginning of the word; the even lines contained internal rhyme in set syllables (not necessarily at the end of the word). Each half-line had exactly six syllables, and each line ended in a trochee. The arrangement of dróttkvætts followed far less rigid rules than the construction of the individual dróttkvætts. [93] Main article: Visual poetry Even before the advent of printing, the visual appearance of poetry often added meaning or depth. Acrostic poems conveyed meanings in the initial letters of lines or in letters at other specific places in a poem. [94] In Arabic , Hebrew and Chinese poetry , the visual presentation of finely calligraphed poems has played an important part in the overall effect of many poems. [95] With the advent of printing , poets gained greater control over the mass-produced visual presentations of their work. Visual elements have become an important part of the poet's toolbox, and many poets have sought to use visual presentation for a wide range of purposes. Some Modernist poets have made the placement of individual lines or groups of lines on the page an integral part of the poem's composition. At times, this complements the poem's rhythm through visual caesuras of various lengths, or creates juxtapositions so as to accentuate meaning, ambiguity or irony , or simply to create an aesthetically pleasing form. In its most extreme form, this can lead to concrete poetry or asemic writing . [96] [97] Main article: Poetic diction Poetic diction treats the manner in which language is used, and refers not only to the sound but also to the underlying meaning and its interaction with sound and form. [98] Many languages and poetic forms have very specific poetic dictions, to the point where distinct grammars and dialects are used specifically for poetry. [99] [100] Registers in poetry can range from strict employment of ordinary speech patterns, as favoured in much late-20th-century prosody , [101] through to highly ornate uses of language, as in medieval and Renaissance poetry. [102] Poetic diction can include rhetorical devices such as simile and metaphor , as well as tones of voice, such as irony . Aristotle wrote in the Poetics that "the greatest thing by far is to be a master of metaphor." [103] Since the rise of Modernism , some poets have opted for a poetic diction that de-emphasizes rhetorical devices, attempting instead the direct presentation of things and experiences and the exploration of tone . [104] On the other hand, Surrealists have pushed rhetorical devices to their limits, making frequent use of catachresis . [105] Allegorical stories are central to the poetic diction of many cultures, and were prominent in the West during classical times, the late Middle Ages and the Renaissance . Aesop's Fables , repeatedly rendered in both verse and prose since first being recorded about 500 BCE, are perhaps the richest single source of allegorical poetry through the ages. [106] Other notables examples include the Roman de la Rose , a 13th-century French poem, William Langland 's Piers Ploughman in the 14th century, and Jean de la Fontaine 's Fables (influenced by Aesop's) in the 17th century. Rather than being fully allegorical, however, a poem may contain symbols or allusions that deepen the meaning or effect of its words without constructing a full allegory. [107] Another element of poetic diction can be the use of vivid imagery for effect. The juxtaposition of unexpected or impossible images is, for example, a particularly strong element in surrealist poetry and haiku . [108] Vivid images are often endowed with symbolism or metaphor. Many poetic dictions use repetitive phrases for effect, either a short phrase (such as Homer's "rosy-fingered dawn" or "the wine-dark sea") or a longer refrain . Such repetition can add a somber tone to a poem, or can be laced with irony as the context of the words changes. [109] See also: Category: Poetic forms Statue of runic singer Petri Shemeikka at Kolmikulmanpuisto Park in Sortavala , Karelia Specific poetic forms have been developed by many cultures. In more developed, closed or "received" poetic forms, the rhyming scheme, meter and other elements of a poem are based on sets of rules, ranging from the relatively loose rules that govern the construction of an elegy to the highly formalized structure of the ghazal or villanelle . [110] Described below are some common forms of poetry widely used across a number of languages. Additional forms of poetry may be found in the discussions of the poetry of particular cultures or periods and in the glossary .
Czech opera[ edit ] Czech composers also developed a thriving national opera movement of their own in the 19th century, starting with Bedřich Smetana , who wrote eight operas including the internationally popular The Bartered Bride . Smetana's eight operas created the bedrock of the Czech opera repertory, but of these only The Bartered Bride is performed regularly outside the composer's homeland. After reaching Vienna in 1892 and London in 1895 it rapidly became part of the repertory of every major opera company worldwide. Leoš Janáček in 1917 Antonín Dvořák 's nine operas, except his first, have librettos in Czech and were intended to convey the Czech national spirit, as were some of his choral works. By far the most successful of the operas is Rusalka which contains the well-known aria "Měsíčku na nebi hlubokém" ("Song to the Moon"); it is played on contemporary opera stages frequently outside the Czech Republic . This is attributable to their uneven invention and libretti, and perhaps also their staging requirements – The Jacobin , Armida , Vanda and Dimitrij need stages large enough to portray invading armies. Score of Smetana's The Bartered Bride Leoš Janáček gained international recognition in the 20th century for his innovative works. His later, mature works incorporate his earlier studies of national folk music in a modern, highly original synthesis, first evident in the opera Jenůfa , which was premiered in 1904 in Brno . The success of Jenůfa (often called the " Moravian national opera") at Prague in 1916 gave Janáček access to the world's great opera stages. Janáček's later works are his most celebrated. They include operas such as Káťa Kabanová and The Cunning Little Vixen , the Sinfonietta and the Glagolitic Mass . Other national operas[ edit ] Spain also produced its own distinctive form of opera, known as zarzuela , which had two separate flowerings: one from the mid-17th century through the mid-18th century, and another beginning around 1850. During the late 18th century up until the mid-19th century, Italian opera was immensely popular in Spain, supplanting the native form. In Russian Eastern Europe, several national operas began to emerge. Ukrainian opera was developed by Semen Hulak-Artemovsky (1813–1873) whose most famous work Zaporozhets za Dunayem (A Cossack Beyond the Danube) is regularly performed around the world. Other Ukrainian opera composers include Mykola Lysenko ( Taras Bulba and Natalka Poltavka ), Heorhiy Maiboroda , and Yuliy Meitus . At the turn of the century, a distinct national opera movement also began to emerge in Georgia under the leadership Zacharia Paliashvili , who fused local folk songs and stories with 19th-century Romantic classical themes. Ferenc Erkel , the father of Hungarian opera The key figure of Hungarian national opera in the 19th century was Ferenc Erkel , whose works mostly dealt with historical themes. Among his most often performed operas are Hunyadi László and Bánk bán . The most famous modern Hungarian opera is Béla Bartók 's Duke Bluebeard's Castle . Stanisław Moniuszko 's opera Straszny Dwór (in English The Haunted Manor) (1861–64) represents a nineteenth-century peak of Polish national opera . [30] In the 20th century, other operas created by Polish composers included King Roger by Karol Szymanowski and Ubu Rex by Krzysztof Penderecki . The first known opera from Turkey (the Ottoman Empire ) was Arshak II , which was an Armenian opera composed by an ethnic Armenian composer Tigran Chukhajian in 1868 and partially performed in 1873. It was fully staged in 1945 in Armenia. Scene from Uzeyir Hajibeyovs " Leyli and Majnun " opera. 1934. Azerbaijan State Academic Opera and Ballet Theater The first years of the Soviet Union saw the emergence of new national operas, such as the Koroğlu (1937) by the Azerbaijani composer Uzeyir Hajibeyov . The first Kyrgyz opera, Ai-Churek, premiered in Moscow at the Bolshoi Theatre on 26 May 1939, during Kyrgyz Art Decade. It was composed by Vladimir Vlasov , Abdylas Maldybaev and Vladimir Fere . The libretto was written by Joomart Bokonbaev, Jusup Turusbekov, and Kybanychbek Malikov. The opera is based on the Kyrgyz heroic epic Manas . [31] [32] In Iran, opera gained more attention after the introduction of Western classical music in the late 19th century. However, it took until mid 20th century for Iranian composers to start experiencing with the field, especially as the construction of the Roudaki Hall in 1967, made possible staging of a large variety of works for stage. Perhaps, the most famous Iranian opera is Rostam and Sohrab by Loris Tjeknavorian premiered not until the early 2000s. Chinese contemporary classical opera , a Chinese language form of Western style opera that is distinct from traditional Chinese opera , has had operas dating back to The White-Haired Girl in 1945. [33] [34] [35] In Latin America, opera started as a result of European colonisation. The first opera ever written in the Americas was La púrpura de la rosa , by Tomás de Torrejón y Velasco , although Partenope , by the Mexican Manuel de Zumaya , was the first opera written from a composer born in Latin America (music now lost). The first Brazilian opera for a libretto in Portuguese was A Noite de São João, by Elias Álvares Lobo . However, Antônio Carlos Gomes is generally regarded as the most outstanding Brazilian composer, having a relative success in Italy with its Brazilian-themed operas with Italian librettos, such as Il Guarany . Opera in Argentina developed in the 20th century after the inauguration of Teatro Colón in Buenos Aires—with the opera Aurora , by Ettore Panizza , being heavily influenced by the Italian tradition, due to immigration. Other important composers from Argentina include Felipe Boero and Alberto Ginastera . Contemporary, recent, and modernist trends[ edit ] Modernism[ edit ] Perhaps the most obvious stylistic manifestation of modernism in opera is the development of atonality . The move away from traditional tonality in opera had begun with Richard Wagner , and in particular the Tristan chord . Composers such as Richard Strauss , Claude Debussy , Giacomo Puccini , [36] Paul Hindemith , Benjamin Britten and Hans Pfitzner pushed Wagnerian harmony further with a more extreme use of chromaticism and greater use of dissonance. Another aspect of modernist opera is the shift away from long, suspended melodies, to short quick mottos, as first illustrated by Giuseppe Verdi in his Falstaff . Composers such as Strauss, Britten, Shostakovich and Stravinsky adopted and expanded upon this style. Arnold Schoenberg in 1917; portrait by Egon Schiele Operatic modernism truly began in the operas of two Viennese composers, Arnold Schoenberg and his student Alban Berg , both composers and advocates of atonality and its later development (as worked out by Schoenberg), dodecaphony . Schoenberg's early musico-dramatic works, Erwartung (1909, premiered in 1924) and Die glückliche Hand display heavy use of chromatic harmony and dissonance in general. Schoenberg also occasionally used Sprechstimme . The two operas of Schoenberg's pupil Alban Berg, Wozzeck (1925) and Lulu (incomplete at his death in 1935) share many of the same characteristics as described above, though Berg combined his highly personal interpretation of Schoenberg's twelve-tone technique with melodic passages of a more traditionally tonal nature (quite Mahlerian in character) which perhaps partially explains why his operas have remained in standard repertory, despite their controversial music and plots. Schoenberg's theories have influenced (either directly or indirectly) significant numbers of opera composers ever since, even if they themselves did not compose using his techniques. Stravinsky in 1921 Composers thus influenced include the Englishman Benjamin Britten , the German Hans Werner Henze , and the Russian Dmitri Shostakovich . ( Philip Glass also makes use of atonality, though his style is generally described as minimalist , usually thought of as another 20th-century development.) [37] However, operatic modernism's use of atonality also sparked a backlash in the form of neoclassicism . An early leader of this movement was Ferruccio Busoni , who in 1913 wrote the libretto for his neoclassical number opera Arlecchino (first performed in 1917). [38] Also among the vanguard was the Russian Igor Stravinsky . After composing music for the Diaghilev -produced ballets Petrushka (1911) and The Rite of Spring (1913), Stravinsky turned to neoclassicism, a development culminating in his opera-oratorio Oedipus rex (1927). Stravinsky had already turned away from the modernist trends of his early ballets to produce small-scale works that do not fully qualify as opera, yet certainly contain many operatic elements, including Renard (1916: "a burlesque in song and dance") and The Soldier's Tale (1918: "to be read, played, and danced"; in both cases the descriptions and instructions are those of the composer). In the latter, the actors declaim portions of speech to a specified rhythm over instrumental accompaniment, peculiarly similar to the older German genre of Melodrama . Well after his Rimsky-Korsakov-inspired works The Nightingale (1914), and Mavra (1922), Stravinsky continued to ignore serialist technique and eventually wrote a full-fledged 18th-century-style diatonic number opera The Rake's Progress (1951). His resistance to serialism (an attitude he reversed following Schoenberg's death) proved to be an inspiration for many[ who? ] other composers. [39] Other trends[ edit ] A common trend throughout the 20th century, in both opera and general orchestral repertoire, is the use of smaller orchestras as a cost-cutting measure; the grand Romantic-era orchestras with huge string sections, multiple harps, extra horns, and exotic percussion instruments were no longer feasible. As government and private patronage of the arts decreased throughout the 20th century, new works were often commissioned and performed with smaller budgets, very often resulting in chamber-sized works, and short, one-act operas. Many of Benjamin Britten 's operas are scored for as few as 13 instrumentalists; Mark Adamo 's two-act realization of Little Women is scored for 18 instrumentalists. Another feature of late 20th-century opera is the emergence of contemporary historical operas, in contrast to the tradition of basing operas on more distant history, the re-telling of contemporary fictional stories or plays, or on myth or legend. The Death of Klinghoffer , Nixon in China , and Doctor Atomic by John Adams , Dead Man Walking by Jake Heggie , Anna Nicole by Mark-Anthony Turnage , and Waiting for Miss Monroe [40] by Robin de Raaff exemplify the dramatisation onstage of events in recent living memory, where characters portrayed in the opera were alive at the time of the premiere performance. The Metropolitan Opera in the US (often known as the Met) reported in 2011 that the average age of its audience was 60. [41] Many opera companies attempted to attract a younger audience to halt the larger trend of greying audiences for classical music since the last decades of the 20th century. [42] Efforts resulted in lowering the average age of the Met's audience to 58 in 2018, the average age at Berlin State Opera was reported as 54, and Paris Opera reported an average age of 48. [43] New York Times critic Anthony Tommasini has suggested that "companies inordinately beholden to standard repertory" are not reaching younger, more curious audiences. [44] Smaller companies in the US have a more fragile existence, and they usually depend on a "patchwork quilt" of support from state and local governments, local businesses, and fundraisers. Nevertheless, some smaller companies have found ways of drawing new audiences. In addition to radio and television broadcasts of opera performances, which have had some success in gaining new audiences, broadcasts of live performances to movie theatres have shown the potential to reach new audiences. [45] From musicals back towards opera[ edit ] By the late 1930s, some musicals began to be written with a more operatic structure. These works include complex polyphonic ensembles and reflect musical developments of their times. Porgy and Bess (1935), influenced by jazz styles, and Candide (1956), with its sweeping, lyrical passages and farcical parodies of opera, both opened on Broadway but became accepted as part of the opera repertory. Popular musicals such as Show Boat , West Side Story , Brigadoon , Sweeney Todd , Passion , Evita , The Light in the Piazza , The Phantom of the Opera and others tell dramatic stories through complex music and in the 2010s they are sometimes seen in opera houses. [46] The Most Happy Fella (1952) is quasi-operatic and has been revived by the New York City Opera . Other rock-influenced musicals , such as Tommy (1969) and Jesus Christ Superstar (1971), Les Misérables (1980), Rent (1996), Spring Awakening (2006), and Natasha, Pierre & The Great Comet of 1812 (2012) employ various operatic conventions, such as through composition , recitative instead of dialogue, and leitmotifs . Acoustic enhancement in opera[ edit ] A subtle type of sound electronic reinforcement called acoustic enhancement is used in some modern concert halls and theatres where operas are performed. Although none of the major opera houses "...use traditional, Broadway-style sound reinforcement, in which most if not all singers are equipped with radio microphones mixed to a series of unsightly loudspeakers scattered throughout the theatre", many use a sound reinforcement system for acoustic enhancement and for subtle boosting of offstage voices, child singers, onstage dialogue, and sound effects (e.g., church bells in Tosca or thunder effects in Wagnerian operas). [47] Operatic voices[ edit ] Operatic vocal technique evolved, in a time before electronic amplification, to allow singers to produce enough volume to be heard over an orchestra, without the instrumentalists having to substantially compromise their volume. Vocal classifications[ edit ] Singers and the roles they play are classified by voice type , based on the tessitura , agility, power and timbre of their voices. Male singers can be classified by vocal range as bass , bass-baritone , baritone , baritenor , tenor and countertenor , and female singers as contralto , mezzo-soprano and soprano . (Men sometimes sing in the "female" vocal ranges, in which case they are termed sopranist or countertenor. The countertenor is commonly encountered in opera, sometimes singing parts written for castrati —men neutered at a young age specifically to give them a higher singing range.) Singers are then further classified by size—for instance, a soprano can be described as a lyric soprano, coloratura , soubrette , spinto , or dramatic soprano. These terms, although not fully describing a singing voice, associate the singer's voice with the roles most suitable to the singer's vocal characteristics. Yet another sub-classification can be made according to acting skills or requirements, for example the basso buffo who often must be a specialist in patter as well as a comic actor. This is carried out in detail in the Fach system of German speaking countries, where historically opera and spoken drama were often put on by the same repertory company. A particular singer's voice may change drastically over his or her lifetime, rarely reaching vocal maturity until the third decade, and sometimes not until middle age. Two French voice types, premiere dugazon and deuxieme dugazon, were named after successive stages in the career of Louise-Rosalie Lefebvre (Mme. Dugazon). Other terms originating in the star casting system of the Parisian theatres are baryton-martin and soprano falcon . Historical use of voice parts[ edit ] The following is only intended as a brief overview. For the main articles, see soprano , mezzo-soprano , contralto , tenor , baritone , bass , countertenor and castrato . The soprano voice has typically been used as the voice of choice for the female protagonist of the opera since the latter half of the 18th century. Earlier, it was common for that part to be sung by any female voice, or even a castrato . The current emphasis on a wide vocal range was primarily an invention of the Classical period . Before that, the vocal virtuosity, not range, was the priority, with soprano parts rarely extending above a high A ( Handel , for example, only wrote one role extending to a high C ), though the castrato Farinelli was alleged to possess a top D (his lower range was also extraordinary, extending to tenor C). The mezzo-soprano, a term of comparatively recent origin, also has a large repertoire, ranging from the female lead in Purcell's Dido and Aeneas to such heavyweight roles as Brangäne in Wagner's Tristan und Isolde (these are both roles sometimes sung by sopranos; there is quite a lot of movement between these two voice-types). For the true contralto, the range of parts is more limited, which has given rise to the insider joke that contraltos only sing "witches, bitches, and britches " roles. In recent years many of the "trouser roles" from the Baroque era, originally written for women, and those originally sung by castrati, have been reassigned to countertenors. The tenor voice, from the Classical era onwards, has traditionally been assigned the role of male protagonist. Many of the most challenging tenor roles in the repertory were written during the bel canto era, such as Donizetti 's sequence of 9 Cs above middle C during La fille du régiment . With Wagner came an emphasis on vocal heft for his protagonist roles, with this vocal category described as Heldentenor; this heroic voice had its more Italianate counterpart in such roles as Calaf in Puccini's Turandot. Basses have a long history in opera, having been used in opera seria in supporting roles, and sometimes for comic relief (as well as providing a contrast to the preponderance of high voices in this genre). The bass repertoire is wide and varied, stretching from the comedy of Leporello in Don Giovanni to the nobility of Wotan in Wagner's Ring Cycle , to the conflicted King Phillip of Verdi's Don Carlos . In between the bass and the tenor is the baritone, which also varies in weight from say, Guglielmo in Mozart's Così fan tutte to Posa in Verdi's Don Carlos; the actual designation "baritone" was not standard until the mid-19th century. Famous singers[ edit ] The castrato Senesino , c. 1720 Early performances of opera were too infrequent for singers to make a living exclusively from the style, but with the birth of commercial opera in the mid-17th century, professional performers began to emerge. The role of the male hero was usually entrusted to a castrato , and by the 18th century, when Italian opera was performed throughout Europe, leading castrati who possessed extraordinary vocal virtuosity, such as Senesino and Farinelli , became international stars. The career of the first major female star (or prima donna ), Anna Renzi , dates to the mid-17th century. In the 18th century, a number of Italian sopranos gained international renown and often engaged in fierce rivalry, as was the case with Faustina Bordoni and Francesca Cuzzoni , who started a fistfight with one another during a performance of a Handel opera. The French disliked castrati, preferring their male heroes to be sung by an haute-contre (a high tenor), of which Joseph Legros (1739–1793) was a leading example. [48] Though opera patronage has decreased in the last century in favor of other arts and media (such as musicals, cinema, radio, television and recordings), mass media and the advent of recording have supported the popularity of many famous singers including Anna Netrebko , Maria Callas , Enrico Caruso , Amelita Galli-Curci , Kirsten Flagstad , Mario Del Monaco , Renata Tebaldi , Risë Stevens , Alfredo Kraus , Franco Corelli , Montserrat Caballé , Joan Sutherland , Birgit Nilsson , Nellie Melba , Rosa Ponselle , Beniamino Gigli , Jussi Björling , Feodor Chaliapin , Cecilia Bartoli , Elena Obraztsova , Renée Fleming , Galina Vishnevskaya , Marilyn Horne , Bryn Terfel , Dmitri Hvorostovsky and The Three Tenors ( Luciano Pavarotti , Plácido Domingo , José Carreras ). Changing role of the orchestra[ edit ] Before the 1700s, Italian operas used a small string orchestra , but it rarely played to accompany the singers. Opera solos during this period were accompanied by the basso continuo group, which consisted of the harpsichord , "plucked instruments" such as lute and a bass instrument. [49] The string orchestra typically only played when the singer was not singing, such as during a singer's "...entrances and exits, between vocal numbers, [or] for [accompanying] dancing". Another role for the orchestra during this period was playing an orchestral ritornello to mark the end of a singer's solo. [49] During the early 1700s, some composers began to use the string orchestra to mark certain aria or recitatives "...as special"; by 1720, most arias were accompanied by an orchestra. Opera composers such as Domenico Sarro , Leonardo Vinci , Giambattista Pergolesi , Leonardo Leo , and Johann Adolph Hasse added new instruments to the opera orchestra and gave the instruments new roles. They added wind instruments to the strings and used orchestral instruments to play instrumental solos, as a way to mark certain arias as special. [49] German opera orchestra from the early 1950s The orchestra has also provided an instrumental overture before the singers come onstage since the 1600s. Peri 's Euridice opens with a brief instrumental ritornello , and Monteverdi 's L'Orfeo (1607) opens with a toccata , in this case a fanfare for muted trumpets . The French overture as found in Jean-Baptiste Lully 's operas [50] consist of a slow introduction in a marked "dotted rhythm", followed by a lively movement in fugato style. The overture was frequently followed by a series of dance tunes before the curtain rose. This overture style was also used in English opera, most notably in Henry Purcell 's Dido and Aeneas . Handel also uses the French overture form in some of his Italian operas such as Giulio Cesare . [51] In Italy, a distinct form called "overture" arose in the 1680s, and became established particularly through the operas of Alessandro Scarlatti , and spread throughout Europe, supplanting the French form as the standard operatic overture by the mid-18th century. [52] It uses three generally homophonic movements : fast–slow–fast. The opening movement was normally in duple metre and in a major key; the slow movement in earlier examples was short, and could be in a contrasting key; the concluding movement was dance-like, most often with rhythms of the gigue or minuet , and returned to the key of the opening section. As the form evolved, the first movement may incorporate fanfare-like elements and took on the pattern of so-called "sonatina form" ( sonata form without a development section), and the slow section became more extended and lyrical. [52] In Italian opera after about 1800, the "overture" became known as the sinfonia. [53] Fisher also notes the term Sinfonia avanti l'opera (literally, the "symphony before the opera") was "an early term for a sinfonia used to begin an opera, that is, as an overture as opposed to one serving to begin a later section of the work". [53] In 19th-century opera, in some operas, the overture, Vorspiel, Einleitung, Introduction, or whatever else it may be called, was the portion of the music which takes place before the curtain rises; a specific, rigid form was no longer required for the overture. The role of the orchestra in accompanying the singers changed over the 19th century, as the Classical style transitioned to the Romantic era. In general, orchestras got bigger, new instruments were added, such as additional percussion instruments (e.g., bass drum, cymbals, snare drum, etc.). The orchestration of orchestra parts also developed over the 19th century. In Wagnerian operas, the forefronting of the orchestra went beyond the overture. In Wagnerian operas such as the Ring Cycle , the orchestra often played the recurrent musical themes or leitmotifs , a role which gave a prominence to the orchestra which "...elevated its status to that of a prima donna ". [54] Wagner's operas were scored with unprecedented scope and complexity, adding more brass instruments and huge ensemble sizes: indeed, his score to Das Rheingold calls for six harps . In Wagner and the work of subsequent composers, such as Benjamin Britten, the orchestra "often communicates facts about the story that exceed the levels of awareness of the characters therein." As a result, critics began to regard the orchestra as performing a role analogous to that of a literary narrator." [55] As the role of the orchestra and other instrumental ensembles changed over the history of opera, so did the role of leading the musicians. In the Baroque era, the musicians were usually directed by the harpsichord player, although the French composer Lully is known to have conducted with a long staff. In the 1800s, during the Classical period, the first violinist, also known as the concertmaster , would lead the orchestra while sitting. Over time, some directors began to stand up and use hand and arm gestures to lead the performers. Eventually this role of music director became termed the conductor , and a podium was used to make it easier for all the musicians to see him or her. By the time Wagnerian operas were introduced, the complexity of the works and the huge orchestras used to play them gave the conductor an increasingly important role. Modern opera conductors have a challenging role: they have to direct both the orchestra in the orchestra pit and the singers on stage. Language and translation issues[ edit ] Since the days of Handel and Mozart, many composers have favored Italian as the language for the libretto of their operas. From the Bel Canto era to Verdi, composers would sometimes supervise versions of their operas in both Italian and French. Because of this, operas such as Lucia di Lammermoor or Don Carlos are today deemed canonical in both their French and Italian versions. [56] Until the mid-1950s, it was acceptable to produce operas in translations even if these had not been authorized by the composer or the original librettists. For example, opera houses in Italy routinely staged Wagner in Italian. [57] After World War II, opera scholarship improved, artists refocused on the original versions, and translations fell out of favor. Knowledge of European languages, especially Italian, French, and German, is today an important part of the training for professional singers. "The biggest chunk of operatic training is in linguistics and musicianship", explains mezzo-soprano Dolora Zajick . "[I have to understand] not only what I'm singing, but what everyone else is singing. I sing Italian, Czech, Russian, French, German, English." [58] In the 1980s, supertitles (sometimes called surtitles ) began to appear. Although supertitles were first almost universally condemned as a distraction, [59] today many opera houses provide either supertitles, generally projected above the theatre's proscenium arch, or individual seat screens where spectators can choose from more than one language. TV broadcasts typically include subtitles even if intended for an audience who knows well the language (for example, a RAI broadcast of an Italian opera). These subtitles target not only the hard of hearing but the audience generally, since a sung discourse is much harder to understand than a spoken one—even in the ears of native speakers. Subtitles in one or more languages have become standard in opera broadcasts, simulcasts, and DVD editions. Funding[ edit ] Swedish opera singers in a tribute to Kjerstin Dellert and the Ulriksdal Palace Theatre at the 40-year jubilee in 2016 of its funding, renovation and subsequent reopening Outside the US, and especially in Europe, most opera houses receive public subsidies from taxpayers. [64] In Milan, Italy, 60% of La Scala's annual budget of €115 million is from ticket sales and private donations, with the remaining 40% coming from public funds. [65] In 2005, La Scala received 25% of Italy's total state subsidy of €464 million for the performing arts. [66] In the UK, Arts Council England provides funds to Opera North , the Royal Opera House , Welsh National Opera , and English National Opera . Between 2012 and 2015, these four opera companies along with the English National Ballet , Birmingham Royal Ballet and Northern Ballet accounted for 22% of the funds in the Arts Council's national portfolio. During that period, the Council undertook an analysis of its funding for large-scale opera and ballet companies, setting recommendations and targets for the companies to meet prior to the 2015–2018 funding decisions. [67] In February 2015, concerns over English National Opera's business plan led to the Arts Council placing it "under special funding arrangements" in what The Independent termed "the unprecedented step" of threatening to withdraw public funding if the council's concerns were not met by 2017. [68] European public funding to opera has led to a disparity between the number of year-round opera houses in Europe and the United States. For example, "Germany has about 80 year-round opera houses [as of 2004], while the U.S., with more than three times the population, does not have any. Even the Met only has a seven-month season." [69] Television, cinema and the Internet[ edit ] Sydney Opera House A milestone for opera broadcasting in the U.S. was achieved on 24 December 1951, with the live broadcast of Amahl and the Night Visitors , an opera in one act by Gian Carlo Menotti . It was the first opera specifically composed for television in America. [70] Another milestone occurred in Italy in 1992 when Tosca was broadcast live from its original Roman settings and times of the day: the first act came from the 16th-century Church of Sant'Andrea della Valle at noon on Saturday; the 16th-century Palazzo Farnese was the setting for the second at 8:15 pm; and on Sunday at 6 am, the third act was broadcast from Castel Sant'Angelo. The production was transmitted via satellite to 105 countries. [71] Major opera companies have begun presenting their performances in local cinemas throughout the United States and many other countries. The Metropolitan Opera began a series of live high-definition video transmissions to cinemas around the world in 2006. [72] In 2007, Met performances were shown in over 424 theaters in 350 U.S. cities. La bohème went out to 671 screens worldwide. San Francisco Opera began prerecorded video transmissions in March 2008. As of June 2008, approximately 125 theaters in 117 U.S. cities carry the showings. The HD video opera transmissions are presented via the same HD digital cinema projectors used for major Hollywood films . [73] European opera houses and festivals including The Royal Opera in London, La Scala in Milan, the Salzburg Festival , La Fenice in Venice, and the Maggio Musicale in Florence have also transmitted their productions to theaters in cities around the world since 2006, including 90 cities in the U.S. [74] [75] The emergence of the Internet has also affected the way in which audiences consume opera. In 2009 the British Glyndebourne Festival Opera offered for the first time an online digital video download of its complete 2007 production of Tristan und Isolde . In the 2013 season, the festival streamed all six of its productions online. [76] [77] In July 2012, the first online community opera was premiered at the Savonlinna Opera Festival . Titled Free Will, it was created by members of the Internet group Opera By You. Its 400 members from 43 countries wrote the libretto, composed the music, and designed the sets and costumes using the Wreckamovie web platform. Savonlinna Opera Festival provided professional soloists, an 80-member choir, a symphony orchestra, and the stage machinery. It was performed live at the festival and streamed live on the internet. [78]
Lyrical themes[ edit ] Reggae is noted for its tradition of social criticism in its lyrics, although many reggae songs discuss lighter, more personal subjects, such as love and socializing. Many early reggae bands covered Motown or Atlantic soul and funk songs. Some reggae lyrics attempt to raise the political consciousness of the audience, such as by criticizing materialism , or by informing the listener about controversial subjects such as apartheid . Many reggae songs promote the use of cannabis (also known as herb, ganja, or sinsemilla ), considered a sacrament in the Rastafari movement . There are many artists who utilize religious themes in their music – whether it be discussing a specific religious topic, or simply giving praise to God ( Jah ). Other common socio-political topics in reggae songs include black nationalism , anti-racism , anti- colonialism , [58] anti-capitalism and criticism of political systems and "Babylon" . In recent years, Jamaican (and non-Jamaican) reggae musicians have used more positive themes in reggae music. The music is widely considered a treasured cultural export for Jamaica, so musicians who still desire progress for their island nation have begun focusing on themes of hopefulness, faith, and love. For elementary children, reggae songs such as "Give a Little Love", "One Love", or "Three Little Birds", all written by Bob Marley, can be sung and enjoyed for their optimism and cheerful lyrics. [59] Criticism of dancehall and reggae lyrics[ edit ] See also: Stop Murder Music Some dancehall and ragga artists have been criticised for homophobia , [60] including threats of violence. [61] Buju Banton 's song "Boom Bye-Bye" states that gays "haffi dead" (have to die). Other notable dancehall artists who have been accused of homophobia include Elephant Man , Bounty Killer and Beenie Man . The controversy surrounding anti-gay lyrics has led to the cancellation of UK tours by Beenie Man and Sizzla. Toronto, Canada has also seen the cancellation of concerts due to artists such as Elephant Man and Sizzla refusing to conform to similar censorship pressures. [62] [63] After lobbying from the Stop Murder Music coalition, the dancehall music industry agreed in 2005 to stop releasing songs that promote hatred and violence against gay people. [64] [65] In June 2007, Beenie Man, Sizzla and Capleton signed up to the Reggae Compassionate Act, in a deal brokered with top dancehall promoters and Stop Murder Music activists. They renounced homophobia and agreed to "not make statements or perform songs that incite hatred or violence against anyone from any community". Five artists targeted by the anti-homophobia campaign did not sign up to the act, including Elephant Man, TOK , Bounty Killa and Vybz Kartel . [66] Buju Banton and Beenie Man both gained positive press coverage around the world for publicly renouncing homophobia by signing the Reggae Compassion Act. However, both of these artists have since denied any involvement in anti-homophobia work and both deny having signed any such act. [67] Global significance[ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2018) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Reggae has spread to many countries around the world, often incorporating local instruments and fusing with other genres. [68] In November 2018 UNESCO added the "reggae music of Jamaica" to the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity . [48] [69] Toots and the Maytals performing at the 2017 Coachella festival Reggae en Español spread from mainland South American Caribbean from Venezuela and Guyana to the rest of South America.  It does not have any specific characteristics other than being sung in Spanish, usually by artists of Latin American origin. Samba reggae originated in Brazil as a blend of samba with Jamaican reggae. Reggae also has a presence in Veracruz , Mexico . The most notable Jarocho reggae group being Los Aguas Aguas from Xalapa . Some of the most popular reggae groups across Latin America come from the Southern Cone, such as the Chilean band Gondwana , and the Argentinian band Los Cafres. The Puerto Rican band Cultura Profética is also widely recognized in the region. Hispanic reggae includes three elements: the incorporation of the Spanish language; the use of translations and versions based on known riddims and background music; and regional consciousness. It is a medium of rebellious contestation rising from the underground. Hispanic reggae is related to rap, sharing characteristics that can be found not only in the social conditions in which they developed in the region but also in the characteristics of social sectors and classes that welcome them. [70] Brazilian samba-reggae utilized themes such as the civil rights movement and the Black Soul movement, and especially the Jamaican independence movement since the 1960s and its messages in reggae and Rastafari. Thus, the sudden popularity of reggae music and musicians in Bahia, Brazil, was not the result of the effects of the transnational music industry, but of the need to establish cultural and political links with black communities across the Americas that had faced and were facing similar sociopolitical situations. [71] Musically, it was the bloco afro Olodum and its lead percussionist, Neguinho do Samba , that began to combine the basic samba beat of the blocos with merengue, salsa, and reggae rhythms and debuted their experimentations in the carnival of 1986. The new toques (drumming patterns) were labeled "samba-reggae" and consisted basically of a pattern in which the surdo bass drums (four of them at minimum) divided themselves into four or five interlocking parts. In the state of Maranhão , in northeastern Brazil , reggae is a very popular genre. São Luís , the state capital, is known as the Brazilian Jamaica. The city has more than 200 radiolas, the name given to sound teams formed by DJs and sound systems with dozens of powerful amplifiers stacked. Reggae in Maranhão has its own characteristics, such as melody and dance style, as well as having its own radio and television programs. In 2018, the Reggae Museum of Maranhão was inaugurated, the second reggae museum in the world (after Jamaica ), with the objective of preserving the state's reggae cultural history. [72] In the United States, bands like Rebelution , Slightly Stoopid , Stick Figure , and SOJA are considered progressive reggae bands sometimes referred to as Cali Reggae or Pacific Dub. The American reggae scene is heavily centred in Southern California , with large scenes also in New York City , Washington, D.C. , Chicago , Miami , and Honolulu . For decades, Hawaiian reggae has had a big following on the Hawaiian islands and the West coast of the US. [73] On the east coast upstate NY has seen a rise in original roots reggae bands such as Giant Panda Guerilla Dub Squad and John Brown's Body who were inspired by Jamaican reggae bands that performed in the area in the 1980s and 1990s. [74] Matisyahu gained prominence by blending traditional Jewish themes with reggae. [75] Compounding his use of the hazzan style, Matisyahu's lyrics are mostly English with more than occasional use of Hebrew and Yiddish . There is a large Caribbean presence in Toronto and Montreal , Canada , with English and French influences on the reggae genre.[ clarification needed ][ citation needed ] Canadian band Magic! 's 2013 single " Rude " was an international hit. Europe[ edit ] The UK was a primary destination for Caribbean people looking to emigrate as early as the 1950s. Because of this, Caribbean music in the United Kingdom , including reggae, has been popular since the late 1960s, and has evolved into several subgenres and fusions. Most notable of these is lovers rock , but this fusion of Jamaican music into English culture was seminal in the formation of other musical forms like drum and bass and dubstep . The UK became the base from which many Jamaican artists toured Europe and due to the large number of Jamaican musicians emigrating there, the UK is the root of the larger European scene that exists today. Many of the world's most famous reggae artists began their careers in UK. Singer and Grammy Award-winning reggae artist Maxi Priest began his career with seminal British sound system Saxon Studio International . Three reggae-tinged singles from the Police 's 1978 debut album, Outlandos d'Amour , laid down the template for the basic structure of a lot of rock/reggae songwriting: a reggae-infused verse containing upstrokes on guitar or keyboards and a more aggressive, on-the-beat punk/rock attack during the chorus. The end of the 1970s featured a ska revival in the UK. By the end of the 1970s, a revival movement had begun in England, with such bands as the Specials, Madness, the (English) Beat, and the Selecter. The Specials' leader and keyboardist, Jerry Dammers , founded the 2 Tone record label, which released albums from the aforementioned racially integrated groups and was instrumental in creating a new social and cultural awareness. The 2 Tone movement referenced reggae's godfathers, popular styles (including the genre's faster and more dance-oriented precursors, ska and rocksteady), and previous modes of dress (such as black suits and porkpie hats) but updated the sound with a faster tempo, more guitar, and more attitude. [79] UB40 perform in Birmingham, 2010 Birmingham based reggae/ pop music band UB40 were main contributors to the British reggae scene throughout the 1980s and 1990s. The achieved international success with hits such as " Red Red Wine ", " Kingston Town " and " (I Can't Help) Falling in Love with You ." Other UK-based artists that had international impact include Aswad , Misty in Roots , Steel Pulse , Janet Kay , Tippa Irie , Smiley Culture and more recently Bitty McLean . There have been a number of European artists and bands drawing their inspiration directly from Jamaica and the Caribbean community in Europe, whose music and vocal styles are almost identical to contemporary Jamaican music. The best examples might be Alborosie (Italy) and Gentleman (Germany). Both Gentleman and Alborosie have had a significant chart impact in Jamaica, unlike many European artists. They have both recorded and released music in Jamaica for Jamaican labels and producers and are popular artists, likely to appear on many riddims . Alborosie has lived in Jamaica since the late 1990s and has recorded at Bob Marley's famous Tuff Gong Studios. Since the early 1990s, several Italian reggae bands have emerged, including Africa Unite, Gaudi , Reggae National Tickets, Sud Sound System , Pitura Freska and B.R. Stylers . Reggae appeared on the Yugoslav popular music scene in the late 1970s, through sporadic songs by various rock acts, most prominently by new wave bands Haustor , Šarlo Akrobata , Aerodrom , Laboratorija Zvuka , Piloti , Zana , Du Du A and Grupa I . In the mid-1980s appeared Del Arno Band , often considered the first Yugoslav band whose sound was primarily reggae-oriented, remaining one of the most notable reggae acts on the post-Yugoslav music scene. The first homegrown Polish reggae bands started in the 1980s with groups like Izrael . Singer and songwriter Alexander Barykin was considered the father of Russian reggae. [80] In Sweden, Uppsala Reggae Festival attracts attendees from across Northern Europe and features Swedish reggae bands such as Rootvälta and Svenska Akademien as well as many popular Jamaican artists. Summerjam , Europe's biggest reggae festival, takes place in Cologne , Germany , and sees crowds of 25,000 or more. Rototom Sunsplash , a week-long festival which used to take place in Osoppo , Italy , until 2009, is now held in Benicassim , Spain , and gathers up to 150,000 visitors every year. In Iceland reggae band Hjálmar is well established having released six CDs in Iceland. They were the first reggae band in Iceland, but few Icelandic artists had written songs in the reggae style before their arrival on the Icelandic music scene. The Icelandic reggae scene is expanding and growing at a fast rate. RVK Soundsystem is the first Icelandic sound system , counting five DJs. They hold reggae nights in Reykjavík every month at clubs Hemmi og Valdi and more recently in Faktorý as the crowd has grown so much. In Germany, the three successful Reggae Summerjam open-air festivals were crucial parts of the renaissance of Caribbean music in Germany but in 1990, conflict broke out between the two main German promoters who had cooperated so well during the previous seasons. With a lot of infighting and personal quarrels, each of them pursued his own preparations for a big summer festival. The result was that two open-air events look place on the same day. The 1990 Reggae Summerjam was staged as usual, but for only one day. The event took place at the Lorelei Rock amphitheater, with artists like Mad Professor's Ariwa Posse with Macka B and Kofi, Mutabaruka, the Mighty Diamonds, the Twinkle Brothers, Manu Dibango and Fela Kuti. The other, ex-partner of the once-united promoters succeeded in bringing the original Sunsplash package to Germany for the first time. Close to the Main River in the little village of Gemaunden deep in rural south-central Germany, they staged a two-day festival that drew a bigger crowd. About 10,000 people came from all over the country as well as from neighboring states like trance[ clarification needed ] and, for the first time, East Germany to see the lineup of top reggae artists. [81] Africa[ edit ] Reggae in Africa was much boosted by the visit of Bob Marley to Zimbabwe on Independence Day 18 April 1980. Nigerian reggae had developed in the 1970s with artists such as Majek Fashek proving popular.  In South Africa , reggae music has played a unifying role amongst cultural groups in Cape Town . During the years of Apartheid , the music bonded people from all demographic groups. Lucky Dube recorded 25 albums, fusing reggae with Mbaqanga . The Marcus Garvey Rasta camp in Phillipi is regarded by many to be the reggae and Rastafari center of Cape Town. Reggae bands play regularly at community centres such as the Zolani center in Nyanga . In Uganda musician Papa Cidy is very popular. Arthur Lutta is also a Ugandan gospel reggae drummer known for his reggae style drumming. In Ethiopia , Dub Colossus and Invisible System emerged in 2008 sharing core members, and have received wide acclaim. [82] [83] [84] In Mali, Askia Modibo fuses reggae with Malian music . In Malawi , Black Missionaries produced nine albums. In Ivory Coast a country where reggae music is extremely popular, Tiken Jah Fakoly fuses reggae with traditional music. Alpha Blondy from Ivory Coast sings reggae with religious lyrics. In Sudan , beats, drums and bass guitar from reggae have been adopted by local music. Reggae is very popular there among generations from young to old; some spiritual (religious) groups grow dreadlocks and feature reggae beats in their chants. Asia[ edit ] In the Philippines, several bands and sound systems play reggae and dancehall music. Their music is called Pinoy reggae . Japanese reggae emerged in the early 1980s. Reggae is becoming more prevalent in Thailand as well. Reggae music is quite popular in Sri Lanka . Aside from the reggae music and Rastafari influences seen ever more on Thailand's islands and beaches, a true reggae sub-culture is taking root in Thailand's cities and towns. Many Thai artists, such as Job 2 Do, keep the tradition of reggae music and ideals alive in Thailand. Famous Indian singer Kailash Kher and music producer Clinton Cerejo created Kalapi, a rare fusion piece of reggae and Indian music for Coke Studio India . [85] Other than this high-profile piece, reggae is confined to a small, emerging scene in India. [86] Reggae Rajahs are a reggae and bass music sound system crew based out of New Delhi, India. [87] They are the first Jamaican style sound system in India and creators of Goa Sunsplash Festival. [86] [88] Thaikkudam Bridge , a neo-Indian band based in Kerala, India, is known for introducing reggae into Indian regional blues. [89] Australia and the Pacific[ edit ] Reggae in Australia originated in the 1980s. Australian reggae groups include Sticky Fingers , Blue King Brown and Astronomy Class . By the end of the 1980s, the local music scene in Hawaii was dominated by Jawaiian music, a local form of reggae.
The Bolden Band around 1905 The music of New Orleans , Louisiana had a profound effect on the creation of early jazz. In New Orleans, slaves could practice elements of their culture such as voodoo and playing drums. [93] Many early jazz musicians played in the bars and brothels of the red-light district around Basin Street called Storyville . [94] In addition to dance bands, there were marching bands which played at lavish funerals (later called jazz funerals ). The instruments used by marching bands and dance bands became the instruments of jazz: brass, drums, and reeds tuned in the European 12-tone scale. Small bands contained a combination of self-taught and formally educated musicians, many from the funeral procession tradition. These bands traveled in black communities in the deep south. Beginning in 1914, Louisiana Creole and African-American musicians played in vaudeville shows which carried jazz to cities in the northern and western parts of the U.S. [95] Jazz became international in 1914, when the Creole Band with cornettist Freddie Keppard performed the first ever jazz concert outside the United States, at the Pantages Playhouse Theatre in Winnipeg , Canada . [96] In New Orleans, a white bandleader named Papa Jack Laine integrated blacks and whites in his marching band. He was known as "the father of white jazz" because of the many top players he employed, such as George Brunies , Sharkey Bonano , and future members of the Original Dixieland Jass Band . During the early 1900s, jazz was mostly performed in African-American and mulatto communities due to segregation laws. Storyville brought jazz to a wider audience through tourists who visited the port city of New Orleans. [97] Many jazz musicians from African-American communities were hired to perform in bars and brothels. These included Buddy Bolden and Jelly Roll Morton in addition to those from other communities, such as Lorenzo Tio and Alcide Nunez . Louis Armstrong started his career in Storyville [98] and found success in Chicago. Storyville was shut down by the U.S. government in 1917. [99] Syncopation Jelly Roll Morton , a Louisiana Creole jazz artist, c. 1917 or 1918 Cornetist Buddy Bolden played in New Orleans from 1895 to 1906. No recordings by him exist. His band is credited with creating the big four: the first syncopated bass drum pattern to deviate from the standard on-the-beat march. [100] As the example below shows, the second half of the big four pattern is the habanera rhythm. Afro-Creole pianist Jelly Roll Morton began his career in Storyville. Beginning in 1904, he toured with vaudeville shows to southern cities, Chicago, and New York City. In 1905, he composed " Jelly Roll Blues ", which became the first jazz arrangement in print when it was published in 1915. It introduced more musicians to the New Orleans style. [101] Morton considered the tresillo/habanera, which he called the Spanish tinge , an essential ingredient of jazz. [102] "Now in one of my earliest tunes, "New Orleans Blues," you can notice the Spanish tinge. In fact, if you can't manage to put tinges of Spanish in your tunes, you will never be able to get the right seasoning, I call it, for jazz." [71] An excerpt of "New Orleans Blues" is shown below. In the excerpt, the left hand plays the tresillo rhythm, while the right hand plays variations on cinquillo. Morton was a crucial innovator in the evolution from the early jazz form known as ragtime to jazz piano , and could perform pieces in either style; in 1938, Morton made a series of recordings for the Library of Congress in which he demonstrated the difference between the two styles. Morton's solos, however, were still close to ragtime, and were not merely improvisations over chord changes as in later jazz, but his use of the blues was of equal importance. Swing in the early 20th century Morton loosened ragtime's rigid rhythmic feeling, decreasing its embellishments and employing a swing feeling. [103] Swing is the most important and enduring African-based rhythmic technique used in jazz. An oft quoted definition of swing by Louis Armstrong is: "if you don't feel it, you'll never know it." [104] The New Harvard Dictionary of Music states that swing is: "An intangible rhythmic momentum in jazz...Swing defies analysis; claims to its presence may inspire arguments." The dictionary does nonetheless provide the useful description of triple subdivisions of the beat contrasted with duple subdivisions: [105] swing superimposes six subdivisions of the beat over a basic pulse structure or four subdivisions. This aspect of swing is far more prevalent in African-American music than in Afro-Caribbean music. One aspect of swing, which is heard in more rhythmically complex Diaspora musics, places strokes in-between the triple and duple-pulse "grids". [106] New Orleans brass bands are a lasting influence, contributing horn players to the world of professional jazz with the distinct sound of the city whilst helping black children escape poverty. The leader of New Orleans' Camelia Brass Band , D'Jalma Ganier, taught Louis Armstrong to play trumpet; Armstrong would then popularize the New Orleans style of trumpet playing, and then expand it. Like Jelly Roll Morton, Armstrong is also credited with the abandonment of ragtime's stiffness in favor of swung notes. Armstrong, perhaps more than any other musician, codified the rhythmic technique of swing in jazz and broadened the jazz solo vocabulary. [107] The Original Dixieland Jass Band made the music's first recordings early in 1917, and their " Livery Stable Blues " became the earliest released jazz record. [108] [109] [110] [111] [112] [113] [114] That year, numerous other bands made recordings featuring "jazz" in the title or band name, but most were ragtime or novelty records rather than jazz. In February 1918 during World War I, James Reese Europe's "Hellfighters" infantry band took ragtime to Europe, [115] [116] then on their return recorded Dixieland standards including " Darktown Strutters' Ball ". [81] The Jazz Age Main article: Jazz Age The King & Carter Jazzing Orchestra photographed in Houston, Texas, January 1921 From 1920 to 1933, Prohibition in the United States banned the sale of alcoholic drinks, resulting in illicit speakeasies which became lively venues of the "Jazz Age", hosting popular music, dance songs, novelty songs, and show tunes. Jazz began to get a reputation as immoral, and many members of the older generations saw it as a threat to the old cultural values by promoting the decadent values of the Roaring 20s. Henry van Dyke of Princeton University wrote, "... it is not music at all. It's merely an irritation of the nerves of hearing, a sensual teasing of the strings of physical passion." [117] The New York Times reported that Siberian villagers used jazz to scare away bears, but the villagers had used pots and pans; another story claimed that the fatal heart attack of a celebrated conductor was caused by jazz. [117] The Original Dixieland Jass Band performing "Jazz Me Blues", an example of a jazz piece from 1921 Problems playing this file? See media help . In 1919, Kid Ory 's Original Creole Jazz Band of musicians from New Orleans began playing in San Francisco and Los Angeles, where in 1922 they became the first black jazz band of New Orleans origin to make recordings. [118] [119] During the same year, Bessie Smith made her first recordings. [120] Chicago was developing " Hot Jazz ", and King Oliver joined Bill Johnson . Bix Beiderbecke formed The Wolverines in 1924. Despite its Southern black origins, there was a larger market for jazzy dance music played by white orchestras. In 1918, Paul Whiteman and his orchestra became a hit in San Francisco. He signed a contract with Victor and became the top bandleader of the 1920s, giving hot jazz a white component, hiring white musicians such as Bix Beiderbecke , Jimmy Dorsey , Tommy Dorsey , Frankie Trumbauer , and Joe Venuti . In 1924, Whiteman commissioned George Gershwin 's Rhapsody in Blue , which was premiered by his orchestra. Jazz began to be recognized as a notable musical form. Olin Downes , reviewing the concert in The New York Times, wrote, "This composition shows extraordinary talent, as it shows a young composer with aims that go far beyond those of his ilk, struggling with a form of which he is far from being master. ... In spite of all this, he has expressed himself in a significant and, on the whole, highly original form. ... His first theme ... is no mere dance-tune ... it is an idea, or several ideas, correlated and combined in varying and contrasting rhythms that immediately intrigue the listener." [121] After Whiteman's band successfully toured Europe, huge hot jazz orchestras in theater pits caught on with other whites, including Fred Waring , Jean Goldkette , and Nathaniel Shilkret . According to Mario Dunkel, Whiteman's success was based on a "rhetoric of domestication" according to which he had elevated and rendered valuable (read "white") a previously inchoate (read "black") kind of music. [122] Louis Armstrong began his career in New Orleans and became one of jazz's most recognizable performers. Whiteman's success caused black artists to follow suit, including Earl Hines (who opened in The Grand Terrace Cafe in Chicago in 1928), Washington, D.C.-native Duke Ellington (who opened at the Cotton Club in Harlem in 1927), Lionel Hampton , Fletcher Henderson , Claude Hopkins , and Don Redman , with Henderson and Redman developing the "talking to one another" formula for "hot" swing music. [123] In 1924, Louis Armstrong joined the Fletcher Henderson dance band for a year, as featured soloist. By 1924, one of Armstrong 's favorite "Sweet Jazz" Big bands was also formed in Canada by Guy Lombardo . His Royal Canadians Orchestra specialized in performances of "the Sweetest music this side of Heaven" which transcended racial boundaries. [124] [125] The original New Orleans style was polyphonic, with theme variation and simultaneous collective improvisation. Armstrong was a master of his hometown style, but by the time he joined Henderson's band, he was already a trailblazer in a new phase of jazz, with its emphasis on arrangements and soloists. Armstrong's solos went well beyond the theme-improvisation concept and extemporized on chords, rather than melodies. According to Schuller, by comparison, the solos by Armstrong's bandmates (including a young Coleman Hawkins ), sounded "stiff, stodgy", with "jerky rhythms and a grey undistinguished tone quality". [126] The following example shows a short excerpt of the straight melody of "Mandy, Make Up Your Mind" by George W. Meyer and Arthur Johnston (top), compared with Armstrong's solo improvisations (below) (recorded 1924). [127] Armstrong's solos were a significant factor in making jazz a true 20th-century language. After leaving Henderson's group, Armstrong formed his Hot Five band, where he popularized scat singing . [128] Swing in the 1920s and 1930s Main articles: Swing music and 1930s in jazz Benny Goodman (1943) The 1930s belonged to popular swing big bands, in which some virtuoso soloists became as famous as the band leaders. Key figures in developing the "big" jazz band included bandleaders and arrangers Count Basie , Cab Calloway , Jimmy and Tommy Dorsey , Duke Ellington , Benny Goodman , Fletcher Henderson , Earl Hines , Harry James , Jimmie Lunceford , Glenn Miller and Artie Shaw . Although it was a collective sound, swing also offered individual musicians a chance to "solo" and improvise melodic, thematic solos which could at times be complex "important" music. Over time, social strictures regarding racial segregation began to relax in America: white bandleaders began to recruit black musicians and black bandleaders white ones. In the mid-1930s, Benny Goodman hired pianist Teddy Wilson , vibraphonist Lionel Hampton and guitarist Charlie Christian to join small groups. In the 1930s, Kansas City Jazz as exemplified by tenor saxophonist Lester Young marked the transition from big bands to the bebop influence of the 1940s. An early 1940s style known as "jumping the blues" or jump blues used small combos, uptempo music and blues chord progressions, drawing on boogie-woogie from the 1930s. The influence of Duke Ellington Duke Ellington at the Hurricane Club (1943) While swing was reaching the height of its popularity, Duke Ellington spent the late 1920s and 1930s in Washington, D.C's jazz scene, developing an innovative musical idiom for his orchestra. Abandoning the conventions of swing, he experimented with orchestral sounds, harmony, and musical form with complex compositions that still translated well for popular audiences; some of his tunes became hits , and his own popularity spanned from the United States to Europe. [129] Ellington called his music American Music, rather than jazz, and liked to describe those who impressed him as "beyond category". [130] These included many musicians from his orchestra, some of whom are considered among the best in jazz in their own right, but it was Ellington who melded them into one of the most popular jazz orchestras in the history of jazz. He often composed for the style and skills of these individuals, such as "Jeep's Blues" for Johnny Hodges , "Concerto for Cootie" for Cootie Williams (which later became " Do Nothing Till You Hear from Me " with Bob Russell 's lyrics), and "The Mooche" for Tricky Sam Nanton and Bubber Miley . He also recorded compositions written by his bandsmen, such as Juan Tizol 's " Caravan " and " Perdido ", which brought the "Spanish Tinge" to big-band jazz. Several members of the orchestra remained with him for several decades. The band reached a creative peak in the early 1940s, when Ellington and a small hand-picked group of his composers and arrangers wrote for an orchestra of distinctive voices who displayed tremendous creativity. [131] Beginnings of European jazz As only a limited number of American jazz records were released in Europe, European jazz traces many of its roots to American artists such as James Reese Europe, Paul Whiteman, and Lonnie Johnson , who visited Europe during and after World War I. It was their live performances which inspired European audiences' interest in jazz, as well as the interest in all things American (and therefore exotic) which accompanied the economic and political woes of Europe during this time. [132] The beginnings of a distinct European style of jazz began to emerge in this interwar period. British jazz began with a tour by the Original Dixieland Jazz Band in 1919 . In 1926, Fred Elizalde and His Cambridge Undergraduates began broadcasting on the BBC. Thereafter jazz became an important element in many leading dance orchestras, and jazz instrumentalists became numerous. [133] This style entered full swing in France with the Quintette du Hot Club de France , which began in 1934. Much of this French jazz was a combination of African-American jazz and the symphonic styles in which French musicians were well-trained; in this, it is easy to see the inspiration taken from Paul Whiteman since his style was also a fusion of the two. [134] Belgian guitarist Django Reinhardt popularized gypsy jazz , a mix of 1930s American swing, French dance hall " musette ", and Eastern European folk with a languid, seductive feel; the main instruments were steel stringed guitar, violin, and double bass. Solos pass from one player to another as guitar and bass form the rhythm section. Some researchers believe Eddie Lang and Joe Venuti pioneered the guitar-violin partnership characteristic of the genre, [135] which was brought to France after they had been heard live or on Okeh Records in the late 1920s. [136] Post-war jazz The "classic quintet": Charlie Parker , Tommy Potter , Miles Davis , Dizzy Gillespie , and Max Roach performing at Three Deuces in New York City . Photograph by William P. Gottlieb (August 1947), Library of Congress . The outbreak of World War II marked a turning point for jazz. The swing-era jazz of the previous decade had challenged other popular music as being representative of the nation's culture, with big bands reaching the height of the style's success by the early 1940s; swing acts and big bands traveled with U.S. military overseas to Europe, where it also became popular. [137] Stateside, however, the war presented difficulties for the big-band format: conscription shortened the number of musicians available; the military's need for shellac (commonly used for pressing gramophone records ) limited record production; a shortage of rubber (also due to the war effort) discouraged bands from touring via road travel; and a demand by the musicians' union for a commercial recording ban limited music distribution between 1942 and 1944. [138] Many of the big bands who were deprived of experienced musicians because of the war effort began to enlist young players who were below the age for conscription, as was the case with saxophonist Stan Getz 's entry in a band as a teenager. [139] This coincided with a nationwide resurgence in the Dixieland style of pre-swing jazz; performers such as clarinetist George Lewis , cornetist Bill Davison , and trombonist Turk Murphy were hailed by conservative jazz critics as more authentic than the big bands. [138] Elsewhere, with the limitations on recording, small groups of young musicians developed a more uptempo, improvisational style of jazz, [137] collaborating and experimenting with new ideas for melodic development, rhythmic language, and harmonic substitution , during informal, late-night jam sessions hosted in small clubs and apartments. Key figures in this development were largely based in New York and included pianists Thelonious Monk and Bud Powell , drummers Max Roach and Kenny Clarke , saxophonist Charlie Parker , and trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie . [138] This musical development became known as bebop . [137] Bebop and subsequent post-war jazz developments featured a wider set of notes , played in more complex patterns and at faster tempos than previous jazz. [139] According to Clive James , bebop was "the post-war musical development which tried to ensure that jazz would no longer be the spontaneous sound of joy ... Students of race relations in America are generally agreed that the exponents of post-war jazz were determined, with good reason, to present themselves as challenging artists rather than tame entertainers." [140] The end of the war marked "a revival of the spirit of experimentation and musical pluralism under which it had been conceived", along with "the beginning of a decline in the popularity of jazz music in America", according to American academic Michael H. Burchett. [137] With the rise of bebop and the end of the swing era after the war, jazz lost its cachet as pop music . Vocalists of the famous big bands moved on to being marketed and performing as solo pop singers; these included Frank Sinatra , Peggy Lee , Dick Haymes , and Doris Day . [139] Older musicians who still performed their pre-war jazz, such as Armstrong and Ellington, were gradually viewed in the mainstream as passé. Other younger performers, such as singer Big Joe Turner and saxophonist Louis Jordan , who were discouraged by bebop's increasing complexity, pursued more lucrative endeavors in rhythm and blues, jump blues , and eventually rock and roll . [137] Some, including Gillespie, composed intricate yet danceable pieces for bebop musicians in an effort to make them more accessible, but bebop largely remained on the fringes of American audiences' purview. "The new direction of postwar jazz drew a wealth of critical acclaim, but it steadily declined in popularity as it developed a reputation as an academic genre that was largely inaccessible to mainstream audiences", Burchett said. "The quest to make jazz more relevant to popular audiences, while retaining its artistic integrity, is a constant and prevalent theme in the history of postwar jazz." [137] During its swing period, jazz had been an uncomplicated musical scene; according to Paul Trynka , this changed in the post-war years: Suddenly jazz was no longer straightforward. There was bebop and its variants, there was the last gasp of swing, there were strange new brews like the progressive jazz of Stan Kenton , and there was a completely new phenomenon called revivalism – the rediscovery of jazz from the past, either on old records or performed live by aging players brought out of retirement. From now on it was no good saying that you liked jazz, you had to specify what kind of jazz. And that is the way it has been ever since, only more so. Today, the word 'jazz' is virtually meaningless without further definition. [139] Bebop Main article: Bebop In the early 1940s, bebop-style performers began to shift jazz from danceable popular music toward a more challenging "musician's music". The most influential bebop musicians included saxophonist Charlie Parker, pianists Bud Powell and Thelonious Monk , trumpeters Dizzy Gillespie and Clifford Brown , and drummer Max Roach . Divorcing itself from dance music, bebop established itself more as an art form, thus lessening its potential popular and commercial appeal. Composer Gunther Schuller wrote: "In 1943 I heard the great Earl Hines band which had Bird in it and all those other great musicians. They were playing all the flatted fifth chords and all the modern harmonies and substitutions and Dizzy Gillespie runs in the trumpet section work. Two years later I read that that was 'bop' and the beginning of modern jazz ... but the band never made recordings." [141] Dizzy Gillespie wrote: "People talk about the Hines band being 'the incubator of bop' and the leading exponents of that music ended up in the Hines band. But people also have the erroneous impression that the music was new. It was not. The music evolved from what went before. It was the same basic music. The difference was in how you got from here to here to here...naturally each age has got its own shit." [142] Since bebop was meant to be listened to, not danced to, it could use faster tempos. Drumming shifted to a more elusive and explosive style, in which the ride cymbal was used to keep time while the snare and bass drum were used for accents. This led to a highly syncopated music with a linear rhythmic complexity. [143] Bebop musicians employed several harmonic devices which were not previously typical in jazz, engaging in a more abstracted form of chord-based improvisation. Bebop scales are traditional scales with an added chromatic passing note; [144] bebop also uses "passing" chords, substitute chords , and altered chords . New forms of chromaticism and dissonance were introduced into jazz, and the dissonant tritone (or "flatted fifth") interval became the "most important interval of bebop" [145] Chord progressions for bebop tunes were often taken directly from popular swing-era tunes and reused with a new and more complex melody or reharmonized with more complex chord progressions to form new compositions, a practice which was already well-established in earlier jazz, but came to be central to the bebop style. Bebop made use of several relatively common chord progressions, such as blues (at base, I–IV–V, but often infused with ii–V motion) and " rhythm changes " (I-vi-ii-V) – the chords to the 1930s pop standard " I Got Rhythm ". Late bop also moved towards extended forms that represented a departure from pop and show tunes. The harmonic development in bebop is often traced back to a moment experienced by Charlie Parker while performing "Cherokee" at Clark Monroe's Uptown House , New York, in early 1942. "I'd been getting bored with the stereotyped changes that were being used...and I kept thinking there's bound to be something else. I could hear it sometimes. I couldn't play it...I was working over 'Cherokee,' and, as I did, I found that by using the higher intervals of a chord as a melody line and backing them with appropriately related changes, I could play the thing I'd been hearing. It came alive." [146] Gerhard Kubik postulates that harmonic development in bebop sprang from blues and African-related tonal sensibilities rather than 20th-century Western classical music. "Auditory inclinations were the African legacy in [Parker's] life, reconfirmed by the experience of the blues tonal system, a sound world at odds with the Western diatonic chord categories. Bebop musicians eliminated Western-style functional harmony in their music while retaining the strong central tonality of the blues as a basis for drawing upon various African matrices." [146] Samuel Floyd states that blues was both the bedrock and propelling force of bebop, bringing about a new harmonic conception using extended chord structures that led to unprecedented harmonic and melodic variety, a developed and even more highly syncopated, linear rhythmic complexity and a melodic angularity in which the blue note of the fifth degree was established as an important melodic-harmonic device; and reestablishment of the blues as the primary organizing and functional principle. [143] Kubik wrote: While for an outside observer, the harmonic innovations in bebop would appear to be inspired by experiences in Western "serious" music, from Claude Debussy to Arnold Schoenberg , such a scheme cannot be sustained by the evidence from a cognitive approach. Claude Debussy did have some influence on jazz, for example, on Bix Beiderbecke's piano playing. And it is also true that Duke Ellington adopted and reinterpreted some harmonic devices in European contemporary music. West Coast jazz would run into such debts as would several forms of cool jazz, but bebop has hardly any such debts in the sense of direct borrowings. On the contrary, ideologically, bebop was a strong statement of rejection of any kind of eclecticism, propelled by a desire to activate something deeply buried in self. Bebop then revived tonal-harmonic ideas transmitted through the blues and reconstructed and expanded others in a basically non-Western harmonic approach. The ultimate significance of all this is that the experiments in jazz during the 1940s brought back to African-American music several structural principles and techniques rooted in African traditions. [147] These divergences from the jazz mainstream of the time met a divided, sometimes hostile response among fans and musicians, especially swing players who bristled at the new harmonic sounds. To hostile critics, bebop seemed filled with "racing, nervous phrases". [148] But despite the friction, by the 1950s bebop had become an accepted part of the jazz vocabulary. Afro-Cuban jazz (cu-bop) Machito (maracas) and his sister Graciella Grillo (claves) Machito and Mario Bauza The general consensus among musicians and musicologists is that the first original jazz piece to be overtly based in clave was "Tanga" (1943), composed by Cuban-born Mario Bauza and recorded by Machito and his Afro-Cubans in New York City. "Tanga" began as a spontaneous descarga (Cuban jam session), with jazz solos superimposed on top. [149] This was the birth of Afro-Cuban jazz . The use of clave brought the African timeline, or key pattern , into jazz. Music organized around key patterns convey a two-celled (binary) structure, which is a complex level of African cross-rhythm . [150] Within the context of jazz, however, harmony is the primary referent, not rhythm. The harmonic progression can begin on either side of clave, and the harmonic "one" is always understood to be "one". If the progression begins on the "three-side" of clave, it is said to be in 3–2 clave (shown below). If the progression begins on the "two-side", it is in 2–3 clave. [151] Dizzy Gillespie and Chano Pozo Dizzy Gillespie, 1955 Mario Bauzá introduced bebop innovator Dizzy Gillespie to Cuban conga drummer and composer Chano Pozo . Gillespie and Pozo's brief collaboration produced some of the most enduring Afro-Cuban jazz standards. " Manteca " (1947) is the first jazz standard to be rhythmically based on clave. According to Gillespie, Pozo composed the layered, contrapuntal guajeos (Afro-Cuban ostinatos ) of the A section and the introduction, while Gillespie wrote the bridge. Gillespie recounted: "If I'd let it go like [Chano] wanted it, it would have been strictly Afro-Cuban all the way. There wouldn't have been a bridge. I thought I was writing an eight-bar bridge, but ... I had to keep going and ended up writing a sixteen-bar bridge." [152] The bridge gave "Manteca" a typical jazz harmonic structure, setting the piece apart from Bauza's modal "Tanga" of a few years earlier. Gillespie's collaboration with Pozo brought specific African-based rhythms into bebop. While pushing the boundaries of harmonic improvisation, cu-bop also drew from African rhythm. Jazz arrangements with a Latin A section and a swung B section, with all choruses swung during solos, became common practice with many Latin tunes of the jazz standard repertoire. This approach can be heard on pre-1980 recordings of "Manteca", " A Night in Tunisia ", "Tin Tin Deo", and " On Green Dolphin Street ". "Un Poco Loco" Another jazz composition critical to the development of Afro-Cuban jazz was Bud Powell's " Un Poco Loco ," recorded with Curley Russell on bass and Max Roach on drums. Noted for its "frenetic energy" and "clanging cowbell and polyrhythmic accompaniment," [153] the composition combined Afro-Cuban rhythm with polytonality and preceded further use of modality and avant-garde harmony in Latin jazz. [154] African cross-rhythm Mongo Santamaria (1969) Cuban percussionist Mongo Santamaria first recorded his composition " Afro Blue " in 1959. [155] "Afro Blue" was the first jazz standard built upon a typical African three-against-two (3:2) cross-rhythm , or hemiola . [156] The piece begins with the bass repeatedly playing 6 cross-beats per each measure of 128, or 6 cross-beats per 4 main beats—6:4 (two cells of 3:2). The following example shows the original ostinato "Afro Blue" bass line. The cross noteheads indicate the main beats (not bass notes). When John Coltrane covered "Afro Blue" in 1963, he inverted the metric hierarchy, interpreting the tune as a 34 jazz waltz with duple cross-beats superimposed (2:3). Originally a B♭ pentatonic blues, Coltrane expanded the harmonic structure of "Afro Blue". Perhaps the most respected Afro-cuban jazz combo of the late 1950s was vibraphonist Cal Tjader 's band. Tjader had Mongo Santamaria , Armando Peraza , and Willie Bobo on his early recording dates. Dixieland revival In the late 1940s, there was a revival of Dixieland , harking back to the contrapuntal New Orleans style. This was driven in large part by record company reissues of jazz classics by the Oliver, Morton, and Armstrong bands of the 1930s. There were two types of musicians involved in the revival: the first group was made up of those who had begun their careers playing in the traditional style and were returning to it (or continuing what they had been playing all along), such as Bob Crosby 's Bobcats, Max Kaminsky , Eddie Condon , and Wild Bill Davison . [157] Most of these players were originally Midwesterners, although there were a small number of New Orleans musicians involved. The second group of revivalists consisted of younger musicians, such as those in the Lu Watters band, Conrad Janis , and Ward Kimball and his Firehouse Five Plus Two Jazz Band. By the late 1940s, Louis Armstrong's Allstars band became a leading ensemble. Through the 1950s and 1960s, Dixieland was one of the most commercially popular jazz styles in the US, Europe, and Japan, although critics paid little attention to it. [157] Hard bop Main article: Hard bop Art Blakey (1973) Hard bop is an extension of bebop (or "bop") music that incorporates influences from blues, rhythm and blues, and gospel, especially in saxophone and piano playing. Hard bop was developed in the mid-1950s, coalescing in 1953 and 1954; it developed partly in response to the vogue for cool jazz in the early 1950s and paralleled the rise of rhythm and blues. It has been described as "funky" and can be considered a relative of soul jazz . [158] Some elements of the genre were simplified from their bebop roots. [159] Miles Davis' 1954 performance of "Walkin'" at the first Newport Jazz Festival introduced the style to the jazz world. [160] Further leaders of hard bop's development included the Clifford Brown /Max Roach Quintet, Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers , the Horace Silver Quintet, and trumpeters Lee Morgan and Freddie Hubbard . The late 1950s to early 1960s saw hard boppers form their own bands as a new generation of blues- and bebop-influenced musicians entered the jazz world, from pianists Wynton Kelly and Tommy Flanagan [161] to saxophonists Joe Henderson and Hank Mobley . Coltrane, Johnny Griffin , Mobley, and Morgan all participated on the album A Blowin' Session (1957), considered by Al Campbell to have been one of the high points of the hard bop era. [162] Hard bop was prevalent within jazz for about a decade spanning from 1955 to 1965, [161] but has remained highly influential on mainstream [159] or "straight-ahead" jazz. It went into decline in the late 1960s through the 1970s due to the emergence of other styles such as jazz fusion, but again became influential following the Young Lions Movement and the emergence of neo-bop . [159] Modal jazz Main article: Modal jazz Modal jazz is a development which began in the later 1950s which takes the mode , or musical scale, as the basis of musical structure and improvisation. Previously, a solo was meant to fit into a given chord progression , but with modal jazz, the soloist creates a melody using one (or a small number of) modes. The emphasis is thus shifted from harmony to melody: [163] "Historically, this caused a seismic shift among jazz musicians, away from thinking vertically (the chord), and towards a more horizontal approach (the scale)", [164] explained pianist Mark Levine . The modal theory stems from a work by George Russell . Miles Davis introduced the concept to the greater jazz world with Kind of Blue (1959), an exploration of the possibilities of modal jazz which would become the best selling jazz album of all time. In contrast to Davis' earlier work with hard bop and its complex chord progression and improvisation, Kind of Blue was composed as a series of modal sketches in which the musicians were given scales that defined the parameters of their improvisation and style. [165] "I didn't write out the music for Kind of Blue, but brought in sketches for what everybody was supposed to play because I wanted a lot of spontaneity," [166] recalled Davis. The track "So What" has only two chords: D-7 and E♭-7. [167] Other innovators in this style include Jackie McLean , [168] and two of the musicians who had also played on Kind of Blue: John Coltrane and Bill Evans. Free jazz Main article: Free jazz John Coltrane, 1963 Free jazz, and the related form of avant-garde jazz , broke through into an open space of "free tonality" in which meter, beat, and formal symmetry all disappeared, and a range of world music from India, Africa, and Arabia were melded into an intense, even religiously ecstatic or orgiastic style of playing. [169] While loosely inspired by bebop, free jazz tunes gave players much more latitude; the loose harmony and tempo was deemed controversial when this approach was first developed. The bassist Charles Mingus is also frequently associated with the avant-garde in jazz, although his compositions draw from myriad styles and genres. The first major stirrings came in the 1950s with the early work of Ornette Coleman (whose 1960 album Free Jazz: A Collective Improvisation coined the term) and Cecil Taylor . In the 1960s, exponents included Albert Ayler , Gato Barbieri , Carla Bley , Don Cherry , Larry Coryell , John Coltrane , Bill Dixon , Jimmy Giuffre , Steve Lacy , Michael Mantler , Sun Ra , Roswell Rudd , Pharoah Sanders , and John Tchicai . In developing his late style, Coltrane was especially influenced by the dissonance of Ayler's trio with bassist Gary Peacock and drummer Sunny Murray , a rhythm section honed with Cecil Taylor as leader. In November 1961, Coltrane played a gig at the Village Vanguard, which resulted in the classic Chasin' the 'Trane, which DownBeat magazine panned as "anti-jazz". On his 1961 tour of France, he was booed, but persevered, signing with the new Impulse! Records in 1960 and turning it into "the house that Trane built", while championing many younger free jazz musicians, notably Archie Shepp , who often played with trumpeter Bill Dixon , who organized the 4-day " October Revolution in Jazz " in Manhattan in 1964, the first free jazz festival. A series of recordings with the Classic Quartet in the first half of 1965 show Coltrane's playing becoming increasingly abstract, with greater incorporation of devices like multiphonics , utilization of overtones, and playing in the altissimo register, as well as a mutated return to Coltrane's sheets of sound . In the studio, he all but abandoned his soprano to concentrate on the tenor saxophone. In addition, the quartet responded to the leader by playing with increasing freedom. The group's evolution can be traced through the recordings The John Coltrane Quartet Plays , Living Space and Transition (both June 1965), New Thing at Newport (July 1965), Sun Ship (August 1965), and First Meditations (September 1965). In June 1965, Coltrane and 10 other musicians recorded Ascension , a 40-minute-long piece without breaks that included adventurous solos by young avant-garde musicians as well as Coltrane, and was controversial primarily for the collective improvisation sections that separated the solos. Dave Liebman later called it "the torch that lit the free jazz thing". After recording with the quartet over the next few months, Coltrane invited Pharoah Sanders to join the band in September 1965. While Coltrane used over-blowing frequently as an emotional exclamation-point, Sanders would opt to overblow his entire solo, resulting in a constant screaming and screeching in the altissimo range of the instrument. Free jazz in Europe Peter Brötzmann is a key figure in European free jazz. Free jazz was played in Europe in part because musicians such as Ayler, Taylor, Steve Lacy , and Eric Dolphy spent extended periods of time there, and European musicians such as Michael Mantler and John Tchicai traveled to the U.S. to experience American music firsthand. European contemporary jazz was shaped by Peter Brötzmann , John Surman , Krzysztof Komeda , Zbigniew Namysłowski , Tomasz Stanko , Lars Gullin , Joe Harriott , Albert Mangelsdorff , Kenny Wheeler , Graham Collier , Michael Garrick and Mike Westbrook . They were eager to develop approaches to music that reflected their heritage. Since the 1960s, creative centers of jazz in Europe have developed, such as the creative jazz scene in Amsterdam. Following the work of drummer Han Bennink and pianist Misha Mengelberg , musicians started to explore by improvising collectively until a form (melody, rhythm, a famous song) is found Jazz critic Kevin Whitehead documented the free jazz scene in Amsterdam and some of its main exponents such as the ICP (Instant Composers Pool) orchestra in his book New Dutch Swing. Since the 1990s Keith Jarrett has defended free jazz from criticism. British writer Stuart Nicholson has argued European contemporary jazz has an identity different from American jazz and follows a different trajectory. [170] Latin jazz Main article: Latin jazz Latin jazz is jazz that employs Latin American rhythms and is generally understood to have a more specific meaning than simply jazz from Latin America. A more precise term might be Afro-Latin jazz, as the jazz subgenre typically employs rhythms that either have a direct analog in Africa or exhibit an African rhythmic influence beyond what is ordinarily heard in other jazz. The two main categories of Latin jazz are Afro-Cuban jazz and Brazilian jazz. In the 1960s and 1970s, many jazz musicians had only a basic understanding of Cuban and Brazilian music, and jazz compositions which used Cuban or Brazilian elements were often referred to as "Latin tunes", with no distinction between a Cuban son montuno and a Brazilian bossa nova . Even as late as 2000, in Mark Gridley's Jazz Styles: History and Analysis, a bossa nova bass line is referred to as a "Latin bass figure". [171] It was not uncommon during the 1960s and 1970s to hear a conga playing a Cuban tumbao while the drumset and bass played a Brazilian bossa nova pattern. Many jazz standards such as "Manteca", "On Green Dolphin Street" and "Song for My Father" have a "Latin" A section and a swung B section. Typically, the band would only play an even-eighth "Latin" feel in the A section of the head and swing throughout all of the solos. Latin jazz specialists like Cal Tjader tended to be the exception. For example, on a 1959 live Tjader recording of "A Night in Tunisia", pianist Vince Guaraldi soloed through the entire form over an authentic mambo . [172] Afro-Cuban jazz renaissance For most of its history, Afro-Cuban jazz had been a matter of superimposing jazz phrasing over Cuban rhythms. But by the end of the 1970s, a new generation of New York City musicians had emerged who were fluent in both salsa dance music and jazz, leading to a new level of integration of jazz and Cuban rhythms. This era of creativity and vitality is best represented by the Gonzalez brothers Jerry (congas and trumpet) and Andy (bass). [173] During 1974–1976, they were members of one of Eddie Palmieri 's most experimental salsa groups: salsa was the medium, but Palmieri was stretching the form in new ways. He incorporated parallel fourths, with McCoy Tyner-type vamps. The innovations of Palmieri, the Gonzalez brothers and others led to an Afro-Cuban jazz renaissance in New York City. This occurred in parallel with developments in Cuba [174] The first Cuban band of this new wave was Irakere . Their "Chékere-son" (1976) introduced a style of "Cubanized" bebop-flavored horn lines that departed from the more angular guajeo-based lines which were typical of Cuban popular music and Latin jazz up until that time. It was based on Charlie Parker's composition "Billie's Bounce", jumbled together in a way that fused clave and bebop horn lines. [175] In spite of the ambivalence of some band members towards Irakere's Afro-Cuban folkloric / jazz fusion, their experiments forever changed Cuban jazz: their innovations are still heard in the high level of harmonic and rhythmic complexity in Cuban jazz and in the jazzy and complex contemporary form of popular dance music known as timba . Afro-Brazilian jazz Naná Vasconcelos playing the Afro-Brazilian Berimbau Brazilian jazz, such as bossa nova , is derived from samba , with influences from jazz and other 20th-century classical and popular music styles. Bossa is generally moderately paced, with melodies sung in Portuguese or English, whilst the related jazz-samba is an adaptation of street samba into jazz. The bossa nova style was pioneered by Brazilians João Gilberto and Antônio Carlos Jobim and was made popular by Elizete Cardoso 's recording of " Chega de Saudade " on the Canção do Amor Demais LP. Gilberto's initial releases, and the 1959 film Black Orpheus , achieved significant popularity in Latin America ; this spread to North America via visiting American jazz musicians. The resulting recordings by Charlie Byrd and Stan Getz cemented bossa nova's popularity and led to a worldwide boom, with 1963's Getz/Gilberto , numerous recordings by famous jazz performers such as Ella Fitzgerald and Frank Sinatra , and the eventual entrenchment of the bossa nova style as a lasting influence in world music. Brazilian percussionists such as Airto Moreira and Naná Vasconcelos also influenced jazz internationally by introducing Afro-Brazilian folkloric instruments and rhythms into a wide variety of jazz styles, thus attracting a greater audience to them. [176] [177] [178] While bossa nova has been labeled as jazz by music critics, namely those from outside of Brazil, it has been rejected by many prominent bossa nova musicians such as Jobim, who once said "Bossa nova is not Brazilian jazz." [179] [180] African-inspired Randy Weston Rhythm The first jazz standard composed by a non-Latino to use an overt African 128 cross-rhythm was Wayne Shorter 's " Footprints " (1967). [181] On the version recorded on Miles Smiles by Miles Davis , the bass switches to a 44 tresillo figure at 2:20. "Footprints" is not, however, a Latin jazz tune: African rhythmic structures are accessed directly by Ron Carter (bass) and Tony Williams (drums) via the rhythmic sensibilities of swing . Throughout the piece, the four beats, whether sounded or not, are maintained as the temporal referent. The following example shows the 128 and 44 forms of the bass line. The slashed noteheads indicate the main beats (not bass notes), where one ordinarily taps their foot to "keep time". Pentatonic scales The use of pentatonic scales was another trend associated with Africa. The use of pentatonic scales in Africa probably goes back thousands of years. [182] McCoy Tyner perfected the use of the pentatonic scale in his solos, [183] and also used parallel fifths and fourths, which are common harmonies in West Africa. [184] The minor pentatonic scale is often used in blues improvisation, and like a blues scale, a minor pentatonic scale can be played over all of the chords in a blues. The following pentatonic lick was played over blues changes by Joe Henderson on Horace Silver 's "African Queen" (1965). [185] Jazz pianist, theorist, and educator Mark Levine refers to the scale generated by beginning on the fifth step of a pentatonic scale as the V pentatonic scale. [186] C pentatonic scale beginning on the I (C pentatonic), IV (F pentatonic), and V (G pentatonic) steps of the scale.[ clarification needed ] Levine points out that the V pentatonic scale works for all three chords of the standard II–V–I jazz progression. [187] This is a very common progression, used in pieces such as Miles Davis' "Tune Up". The following example shows the V pentatonic scale over a II–V–I progression. [188] V pentatonic scale over II–V–I chord progression Accordingly, John Coltrane's " Giant Steps " (1960), with its 26 chords per 16 bars, can be played using only three pentatonic scales. Coltrane studied Nicolas Slonimsky 's Thesaurus of Scales and Melodic Patterns, which contains material that is virtually identical to portions of "Giant Steps". [189] The harmonic complexity of "Giant Steps" is on the level of the most advanced 20th-century art music. Superimposing the pentatonic scale over "Giant Steps" is not merely a matter of harmonic simplification, but also a sort of "Africanizing" of the piece, which provides an alternate approach for soloing. Mark Levine observes that when mixed in with more conventional "playing the changes", pentatonic scales provide "structure and a feeling of increased space". [190] Sacred and liturgical jazz Main article: Sacred jazz As noted above, jazz has incorporated from its inception aspects of African-American sacred music including spirituals and hymns. Secular jazz musicians often performed renditions of spirituals and hymns as part of their repertoire or isolated compositions such as "Come Sunday", part of "Black and Beige Suite" by Duke Ellington . Later many other jazz artists borrowed from black gospel music . However, it was only after World War II that a few jazz musicians began to compose and perform extended works intended for religious settings or as religious expression. Since the 1950s, sacred and liturgical music has been performed and recorded by many prominent jazz composers and musicians. [191] The "Abyssinian Mass" by Wynton Marsalis (Blueengine Records, 2016) is a recent example. Relatively little has been written about sacred and liturgical jazz. In a 2013 doctoral dissertation, Angelo Versace examined the development of sacred jazz in the 1950s using disciplines of musicology and history. He noted that the traditions of black gospel music and jazz were combined in the 1950s to produce a new genre, "sacred jazz". [192] Versace maintained that the religious intent separates sacred from secular jazz. Most prominent in initiating the sacred jazz movement were pianist and composer Mary Lou Williams , known for her jazz masses in the 1950s and Duke Ellington . Prior to his death in 1974 in response to contacts from Grace Cathedral in San Francisco, Duke Ellington wrote three Sacred Concerts: 1965 – A Concert of Sacred Music; 1968 – Second Sacred Concert; 1973 – Third Sacred Concert. The most prominent form of sacred and liturgical jazz is the jazz mass. Although most often performed in a concert setting rather than church worship setting, this form has many examples. An eminent example of composers of the jazz mass was Mary Lou Williams . Williams converted to Catholicism in 1957, and proceeded to compose three masses in the jazz idiom. [193] One was composed in 1968 to honor the recently assassinated Martin Luther King Jr. and the third was commissioned by a pontifical commission. It was performed once in 1975 in St Patrick's Cathedral in New York City. However the Catholic Church has not embraced jazz as appropriate for worship. In 1966 Joe Masters recorded "Jazz Mass" for Columbia Records. A jazz ensemble was joined by soloists and choir using the English text of the Roman Catholic Mass. [194] Other examples include "Jazz Mass in Concert" by Lalo Schiffrin (Aleph Records, 1998, UPC 0651702632725) and "Jazz Mass" by Vince Guaraldi (Fantasy Records, 1965). In England, classical composer Will Todd recorded his "Jazz Missa Brevis" with a jazz ensemble, soloists and the St Martin's Voices on a 2018 Signum Records release, "Passion Music/Jazz Missa Brevis" also released as "Mass in Blue", and jazz organist James Taylor composed "The Rochester Mass" (Cherry Red Records, 2015). [195] In 2013, Versace put forth bassist Ike Sturm and New York composer Deanna Witkowski as contemporary exemplars of sacred and liturgical jazz. [192] Jazz fusion Fusion trumpeter Miles Davis in 1989 In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the hybrid form of jazz-rock fusion was developed by combining jazz improvisation with rock rhythms, electric instruments and the highly amplified stage sound of rock musicians such as Jimi Hendrix and Frank Zappa . Jazz fusion often uses mixed meters, odd time signatures, syncopation, complex chords, and harmonies. According to AllMusic : ... until around 1967, the worlds of jazz and rock were nearly completely separate. [However, ...] as rock became more creative and its musicianship improved, and as some in the jazz world became bored with hard bop and did not want to play strictly avant-garde music , the two different idioms began to trade ideas and occasionally combine forces. [196] Miles Davis' new directions In 1969, Davis fully embraced the electric instrument approach to jazz with In a Silent Way , which can be considered his first fusion album. Composed of two side-long suites edited heavily by producer Teo Macero , this quiet, static album would be equally influential to the development of ambient music . As Davis recalls: The music I was really listening to in 1968 was James Brown , the great guitar player Jimi Hendrix , and a new group who had just come out with a hit record, " Dance to the Music ", Sly and the Family Stone ... I wanted to make it more like rock. When we recorded In a Silent Way I just threw out all the chord sheets and told everyone to play off of that. [197] Two contributors to In a Silent Way also joined organist Larry Young to create one of the early acclaimed fusion albums: Emergency! (1969) by The Tony Williams Lifetime . Psychedelic-jazz Weather Report Weather Report 's self-titled electronic and psychedelic Weather Report debut album caused a sensation in the jazz world on its arrival in 1971, thanks to the pedigree of the group's members (including percussionist Airto Moreira ), and their unorthodox approach to music. The album featured a softer sound than would be the case in later years (predominantly using acoustic bass with Shorter exclusively playing soprano saxophone , and with no synthesizers involved), but is still considered a classic of early fusion. It built on the avant-garde experiments which Joe Zawinul and Shorter had pioneered with Miles Davis on Bitches Brew , including an avoidance of head-and-chorus composition in favor of continuous rhythm and movement – but took the music further. To emphasize the group's rejection of standard methodology, the album opened with the inscrutable avant-garde atmospheric piece "Milky Way", which featured by Shorter's extremely muted saxophone inducing vibrations in Zawinul's piano strings while the latter pedaled the instrument. DownBeat described the album as "music beyond category", and awarded it Album of the Year in the magazine's polls that year. Weather Report's subsequent releases were creative funk-jazz works. [198] Jazz-rock Although some jazz purists protested against the blend of jazz and rock, many jazz innovators crossed over from the contemporary hard bop scene into fusion. As well as the electric instruments of rock (such as electric guitar, electric bass, electric piano and synthesizer keyboards), fusion also used the powerful amplification, "fuzz" pedals , wah-wah pedals and other effects that were used by 1970s-era rock bands. Notable performers of jazz fusion included Miles Davis, Eddie Harris , keyboardists Joe Zawinul , Chick Corea , and Herbie Hancock, vibraphonist Gary Burton , drummer Tony Williams , violinist Jean-Luc Ponty , guitarists Larry Coryell , Al Di Meola , John McLaughlin , Ryo Kawasaki , and Frank Zappa , saxophonist Wayne Shorter and bassists Jaco Pastorius and Stanley Clarke . Jazz fusion was also popular in Japan, where the band Casiopea released more than thirty fusion albums. According to jazz writer Stuart Nicholson, "just as free jazz appeared on the verge of creating a whole new musical language in the 1960s ... jazz-rock briefly suggested the promise of doing the same" with albums such as Williams' Emergency! (1970) and Davis' Agharta (1975), which Nicholson said "suggested the potential of evolving into something that might eventually define itself as a wholly independent genre quite apart from the sound and conventions of anything that had gone before." This development was stifled by commercialism, Nicholson said, as the genre "mutated into a peculiar species of jazz-inflected pop music that eventually took up residence on FM radio" at the end of the 1970s. [199] Electronic music Although jazz-rock fusion reached the height of its popularity in the 1970s, the use of electronic instruments and rock-derived musical elements in jazz continued in the 1990s and 2000s. Musicians using this approach include Pat Metheny , John Abercrombie , John Scofield and the Swedish group e.s.t. Since the beginning of the 1990s, electronic music had significant technical improvements that popularized and created new possibilities for the genre. Jazz elements such as improvisation, rhythmic complexities and harmonic textures were introduced to the genre and consequently had a big impact in new listeners and in some ways kept the versatility of jazz relatable to a newer generation that did not necessarily relate to what the traditionalists call real jazz (bebop, cool and modal jazz). [200] Artists such as Squarepusher , Aphex Twin , Flying Lotus and sub genres like IDM , drum 'n' bass , jungle and techno ended up incorporating a lot of these elements. [201] Squarepusher being cited as one big influence for jazz performers drummer Mark Guiliana and pianist Brad Mehldau , showing the correlations between jazz and electronic music are a two-way street. [202] Jazz-funk Main article: Jazz-funk By the mid-1970s, the sound known as jazz-funk had developed, characterized by a strong back beat ( groove ), electrified sounds [203] and, often, the presence of electronic analog synthesizers . Jazz-funk also draws influences from traditional African music, Afro-Cuban rhythms and Jamaican reggae , notably Kingston bandleader Sonny Bradshaw . Another feature is the shift of emphasis from improvisation to composition: arrangements, melody and overall writing became important. The integration of funk , soul , and R&B music into jazz resulted in the creation of a genre whose spectrum is wide and ranges from strong jazz improvisation to soul, funk or disco with jazz arrangements, jazz riffs and jazz solos, and sometimes soul vocals. [204] Early examples are Herbie Hancock's Headhunters band and Miles Davis' On the Corner album, which, in 1972, began Davis' foray into jazz-funk and was, he claimed, an attempt at reconnecting with the young black audience which had largely forsaken jazz for rock and funk. While there is a discernible rock and funk influence in the timbres of the instruments employed, other tonal and rhythmic textures, such as the Indian tambora and tablas and Cuban congas and bongos, create a multi-layered soundscape. The album was a culmination of sorts of the musique concrète approach that Davis and producer Teo Macero had begun to explore in the late 1960s. Straight-ahead jazz Wynton Marsalis The 1980s saw something of a reaction against the fusion and free jazz that had dominated the 1970s. Trumpeter Wynton Marsalis emerged early in the decade, and strove to create music within what he believed was the tradition, rejecting both fusion and free jazz and creating extensions of the small and large forms initially pioneered by artists such as Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington , as well as the hard bop of the 1950s. It is debatable whether Marsalis' critical and commercial success was a cause or a symptom of the reaction against Fusion and Free Jazz and the resurgence of interest in the kind of jazz pioneered in the 1960s (particularly modal jazz and post-bop ); nonetheless there were many other manifestations of a resurgence of traditionalism, even if fusion and free jazz were by no means abandoned and continued to develop and evolve. For example, several musicians who had been prominent in the fusion genre during the 1970s began to record acoustic jazz once more, including Chick Corea and Herbie Hancock . Other musicians who had experimented with electronic instruments in the previous decade had abandoned them by the 1980s; for example, Bill Evans , Joe Henderson , and Stan Getz . Even the 1980s music of Miles Davis , although certainly still fusion, adopted a far more accessible and recognizably jazz-oriented approach than his abstract work of the mid-1970s, such as a return to a theme-and-solos approach. A similar reaction[ vague ] took place against free jazz. According to Ted Gioia : the very leaders of the avant garde started to signal a retreat from the core principles of free jazz. Anthony Braxton began recording standards over familiar chord changes. Cecil Taylor played duets in concert with Mary Lou Williams , and let her set out structured harmonies and familiar jazz vocabulary under his blistering keyboard attack. And the next generation of progressive players would be even more accommodating, moving inside and outside the changes without thinking twice. Musicians such as David Murray or Don Pullen may have felt the call of free-form jazz, but they never forgot all the other ways one could play African-American music for fun and profit. [205] Pianist Keith Jarrett —whose bands of the 1970s had played only original compositions with prominent free jazz elements—established his so-called 'Standards Trio' in 1983, which, although also occasionally exploring collective improvisation, has primarily performed and recorded jazz standards. Chick Corea similarly began exploring jazz standards in the 1980s, having neglected them for the 1970s. In 1987, the United States House of Representatives and Senate passed a bill proposed by Democratic Representative John Conyers Jr. to define jazz as a unique form of American music, stating "jazz is hereby designated as a rare and valuable national American treasure to which we should devote our attention, support and resources to make certain it is preserved, understood and promulgated." It passed in the House on September 23, 1987, and in the Senate on November 4, 1987. [206] In 2001, Ken Burns 's documentary Jazz premiered on PBS , featuring Wynton Marsalis and other experts reviewing the entire history of American jazz to that time. It received some criticism, however, for its failure to reflect the many distinctive non-American traditions and styles in jazz that had developed, and its limited representation of US developments in the last quarter of the 20th century. Neo-bop Main article: Neo-bop The emergence of young jazz talent beginning to perform in older, established musicians' groups further impacted the resurgence of traditionalism in the jazz community. In the 1970s, the groups of Betty Carter and Art Blakey and the Jazz Messengers retained their conservative jazz approaches in the midst of fusion and jazz-rock, and in addition to difficulty booking their acts, struggled to find younger generations of personnel to authentically play traditional styles such as hard bop and bebop . In the late 1970s, however, a resurgence of younger jazz players in Blakey's band began to occur. This movement included musicians such as Valery Ponomarev and Bobby Watson , Dennis Irwin and James Williams . In the 1980s, in addition to Wynton and Branford Marsalis , the emergence of pianists in the Jazz Messengers such as Donald Brown , Mulgrew Miller , and later, Benny Green, bassists such as Charles Fambrough , Lonnie Plaxico (and later, Peter Washington and Essiet Essiet) horn players such as Bill Pierce , Donald Harrison and later Javon Jackson and Terence Blanchard emerged as talented jazz musicians, all of whom made significant contributions in the 1990s and 2000s. The young Jazz Messengers' contemporaries, including Roy Hargrove , Marcus Roberts , Wallace Roney and Mark Whitfield were also influenced by Wynton Marsalis 's emphasis toward jazz tradition. These younger rising stars rejected avant-garde approaches and instead championed the acoustic jazz sound of Charlie Parker, Thelonious Monk and early recordings of the first Miles Davis quintet. This group of "Young Lions" sought to reaffirm jazz as a high art tradition comparable to the discipline of classical music. [207] Starting in the 1990s, a number of players from largely straight-ahead or post-bop backgrounds emerged as a result of the rise of neo-traditionalist jazz, including pianists Jason Moran and Vijay Iyer , guitarist Kurt Rosenwinkel , vibraphonist Stefon Harris , trumpeters Roy Hargrove and Terence Blanchard , saxophonists Chris Potter and Joshua Redman , clarinetist Ken Peplowski and bassist Christian McBride . Smooth jazz David Sanborn , 2008 In the early 1980s, a commercial form of jazz fusion called "pop fusion" or "smooth jazz" became successful, garnering significant radio airplay in " quiet storm " time slots at radio stations in urban markets across the U.S. This helped to establish or bolster the careers of vocalists including Al Jarreau , Anita Baker , Chaka Khan , and Sade , as well as saxophonists including Grover Washington Jr. , Kenny G , Kirk Whalum , Boney James , and David Sanborn . In general, smooth jazz is downtempo (the most widely played tracks are of 90–105 beats per minute ), and has a lead melody-playing instrument (saxophone, especially soprano and tenor, and legato electric guitar are popular). In his Newsweek article "The Problem With Jazz Criticism", [209] Stanley Crouch considers Miles Davis' playing of fusion to be a turning point that led to smooth jazz. Critic Aaron J. West has countered the often negative perceptions of smooth jazz, stating: I challenge the prevalent marginalization and malignment of smooth jazz in the standard jazz narrative. Furthermore, I question the assumption that smooth jazz is an unfortunate and unwelcomed evolutionary outcome of the jazz-fusion era. Instead, I argue that smooth jazz is a long-lived musical style that merits multi-disciplinary analyses of its origins, critical dialogues, performance practice, and reception. [210] Acid jazz, nu jazz, and jazz rap Main articles: Acid jazz , Nu jazz , and Jazz rap Acid jazz developed in the UK in the 1980s and 1990s, influenced by jazz-funk and electronic dance music . Acid jazz often contains various types of electronic composition (sometimes including sampling or live DJ cutting and scratching ), but it is just as likely to be played live by musicians, who often showcase jazz interpretation as part of their performance. Richard S. Ginell of AllMusic considers Roy Ayers "one of the prophets of acid jazz". [211] Nu jazz is influenced by jazz harmony and melodies, and there are usually no improvisational aspects. It can be very experimental in nature and can vary widely in sound and concept. It ranges from the combination of live instrumentation with the beats of jazz house (as exemplified by St Germain , Jazzanova , and Fila Brazillia ) to more band-based improvised jazz with electronic elements (for example, The Cinematic Orchestra , Kobol and the Norwegian "future jazz" style pioneered by Bugge Wesseltoft , Jaga Jazzist , and Nils Petter Molvær ). Jazz rap developed in the late 1980s and early 1990s and incorporates jazz influences into hip hop . In 1988, Gang Starr released the debut single "Words I Manifest", which sampled Dizzy Gillespie's 1962 "Night in Tunisia", and Stetsasonic released "Talkin' All That Jazz", which sampled Lonnie Liston Smith . Gang Starr's debut LP No More Mr. Nice Guy (1989) and their 1990 track "Jazz Thing" sampled Charlie Parker and Ramsey Lewis . The groups which made up the Native Tongues Posse tended toward jazzy releases: these include the Jungle Brothers ' debut Straight Out the Jungle (1988), and A Tribe Called Quest 's People's Instinctive Travels and the Paths of Rhythm (1990) and The Low End Theory (1991). Rap duo Pete Rock & CL Smooth incorporated jazz influences on their 1992 debut Mecca and the Soul Brother . Rapper Guru 's Jazzmatazz series began in 1993 using jazz musicians during the studio recordings. Although jazz rap had achieved little mainstream success, Miles Davis' final album Doo-Bop (released posthumously in 1992) was based on hip hop beats and collaborations with producer Easy Mo Bee . Davis' ex-bandmate Herbie Hancock also absorbed hip-hop influences in the mid-1990s, releasing the album Dis Is Da Drum in 1994. The mid-2010s saw an increased influence of R&B, hip-hop, and pop music on jazz. In 2015, Kendrick Lamar released his third studio album, To Pimp a Butterfly . The album heavily featured prominent contemporary jazz artists such as Thundercat [212] and redefined jazz rap with a larger focus on improvisation and live soloing rather than simply sampling. In that same year, saxophonist Kamasi Washington released his nearly three-hour long debut, The Epic . Its hip-hop inspired beats and R&B vocal interludes was not only acclaimed by critics for being innovative in keeping jazz relevant, [213] but also sparked a small resurgence in jazz on the internet. Punk jazz and jazzcore John Zorn performing in 2006 The relaxation of orthodoxy which was concurrent with post-punk in London and New York City led to a new appreciation of jazz. In London, the Pop Group began to mix free jazz and dub reggae into their brand of punk rock. [214] In New York, No Wave took direct inspiration from both free jazz and punk. Examples of this style include Lydia Lunch 's Queen of Siam, [215] Gray, the work of James Chance and the Contortions (who mixed Soul with free jazz and punk ) [215] and the Lounge Lizards [215] (the first group to call themselves " punk jazz "). John Zorn took note of the emphasis on speed and dissonance that was becoming prevalent in punk rock, and incorporated this into free jazz with the release of the Spy vs. Spy album in 1986, a collection of Ornette Coleman tunes done in the contemporary thrashcore style. [216] In the same year, Sonny Sharrock , Peter Brötzmann , Bill Laswell , and Ronald Shannon Jackson recorded the first album under the name Last Exit , a similarly aggressive blend of thrash and free jazz. [217] These developments are the origins of jazzcore, the fusion of free jazz with hardcore punk . M-Base Main article: M-Base Steve Coleman in Paris, July 2004 The M-Base movement started in the 1980s, when a loose collective of young African-American musicians in New York which included Steve Coleman , Greg Osby , and Gary Thomas developed a complex but grooving [218] sound. In the 1990s, most M-Base participants turned to more conventional music, but Coleman, the most active participant, continued developing his music in accordance with the M-Base concept. [219] Coleman's audience decreased, but his music and concepts influenced many musicians, according to pianist Vijay Iver and critic Ben Ratlifff of The New York Times. [220] [221] M-Base changed from a movement of a loose collective of young musicians to a kind of informal Coleman "school", [222] with a much advanced but already originally implied concept. [223] Steve Coleman's music and M-Base concept gained recognition as "next logical step" after Charlie Parker, John Coltrane, and Ornette Coleman. [224] Jazz pluralism Since the 1990s, jazz has been characterized by a pluralism in which no one style dominates, but rather a wide range of styles and genres are popular. Individual performers often play in a variety of styles, sometimes in the same performance. Pianist Brad Mehldau and The Bad Plus have explored contemporary rock music within the context of the traditional jazz acoustic piano trio, recording instrumental jazz versions of songs by rock musicians. The Bad Plus have also incorporated elements of free jazz into their music. A firm avant-garde or free jazz stance has been maintained by some players, such as saxophonists Greg Osby and Charles Gayle , while others, such as James Carter , have incorporated free jazz elements into a more traditional framework. Joan Chamorro (bass), Andrea Motis (trumpet), and Ignasi Terraza (piano) in 2018 Harry Connick Jr. began his career playing stride piano and the Dixieland jazz of his home, New Orleans, beginning with his first recording when he was 10 years old. [225] Some of his earliest lessons were at the home of pianist Ellis Marsalis . [226] Connick had success on the pop charts after recording the soundtrack to the movie When Harry Met Sally , which sold over two million copies. [225] Crossover success has also been achieved by Diana Krall , Norah Jones , Cassandra Wilson , Kurt Elling , and Jamie Cullum . Additionally, the era saw the release of recordings and videos from the previous century, such as a Just Jazz tape broadcast by a band led by Gene Ammons [227] and studio archives such as Just Coolin' by Art Blakey and the Jazz Messengers . [228] Social media An internet-aided trend of 2010's jazz was that of extreme reharmonization , inspired by both virtuosic players known for their speed and rhythm such as Art Tatum , as well as players known for their ambitious voicings and chords such as Bill Evans. Supergroup Snarky Puppy adopted this trend, allowing players like Cory Henry [229] to shape the grooves and harmonies of modern jazz soloing. YouTube phenomenon Jacob Collier also gained recognition for his ability to play an incredibly large number of instruments and his ability to use microtones , advanced polyrhythms, and blend a spectrum of genres in his largely homemade production process. [230] [231] Other jazz musicians gained popularity through social media during the 2010s and 2020s. These included Joan Chamorro , a bassist and bandleader based in Barcelona whose big band and jazz combo videos have received tens of millions of views on YouTube, [232] and Emmet Cohen , who broadcast a series of performances live from New York starting in March 2020. [233] See also
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of rock music For the 1960s genre also known as "punk rock", see Garage rock . For the play, see Punk Rock (play) . Punk rock Mid-1970s, United States, United Kingdom, and Australia Derivative forms e Punk rock (also known as simply punk) is a music genre that emerged in the mid-1970s. Rooted in 1950s rock and roll [2] [3] [4] and 1960s garage rock , punk bands rejected the corporate nature of mainstream 1970s rock music. They typically produced short, fast-paced songs with hard-edged melodies and singing styles with stripped-down instrumentation. Lyricism in punk typically revolves around anti-establishment and anti-authoritarian themes. Punk embraces a DIY ethic ; many bands self-produce recordings and distribute them through independent labels . The term "punk rock" was previously used by American rock critics in the early 1970s to describe the mid-1960s garage bands. Certain late 1960s and early 1970s Detroit acts, such as MC5 and Iggy and the Stooges , and other bands from elsewhere created out-of-the-mainstream music that became highly influential on what was to come. Glam rock in the UK and the New York Dolls from New York have also been cited as key influences. Between 1974 and 1976, when the genre that became known as punk was developing, prominent acts included Television , Patti Smith , and the Ramones in New York City; the Saints in Brisbane ; the Sex Pistols , the Clash , and the Damned in London, and the Buzzcocks in Manchester. By late 1976, punk had become a major cultural phenomenon in the UK. It gave rise to a punk subculture that expressed youthful rebellion through distinctive styles of clothing , such as T-shirts with deliberately offensive graphics, leather jackets, studded or spiked bands and jewellery, safety pins, and bondage and S&M clothes. In 1977, the influence of the music and subculture spread worldwide. It took root in a wide range of local scenes that often rejected affiliation with the mainstream. In the late 1970s, punk experienced a second wave, when new acts that had not been active during its formative years adopted the style. By the early 1980s, faster and more aggressive subgenres, such as hardcore punk (e.g., Minor Threat ), Oi! (e.g., Sham 69 ), street punk (e.g., the Exploited ), and anarcho-punk (e.g., Crass ), became some of the predominant modes of punk rock, while bands more similar in form to the first wave (e.g., X , the Adicts ) also flourished. Many musicians who identified with punk or were inspired by it went on to pursue other musical directions, giving rise to movements such as post-punk , new wave , thrash metal , and alternative rock . Following alternative rock's mainstream breakthrough in the 1990s with Nirvana , punk rock saw renewed major-label interest and mainstream appeal exemplified by the rise of the California bands Green Day , Social Distortion , Rancid , the Offspring , Bad Religion , and NOFX . Outlook[ edit ] The first wave of punk rock was "aggressively modern" and differed from what came before. [5] According to Ramones drummer Tommy Ramone , "In its initial form, a lot of 1960s stuff was innovative and exciting. Unfortunately, what happens is that people who could not hold a candle to the likes of Hendrix started noodling away. Soon you had endless solos that went nowhere. By 1973, I knew that what was needed was some pure, stripped down, no bullshit rock 'n' roll." [6] John Holmstrom , founding editor of Punk magazine, recalls feeling "punk rock had to come along because the rock scene had become so tame that [acts] like Billy Joel and Simon and Garfunkel were being called rock and roll, when to me and other fans, rock and roll meant this wild and rebellious music." [7] According to Robert Christgau , punk "scornfully rejected the political idealism and Californian flower-power silliness of hippie myth." [8] Hippies were rainbow extremists; punks are romantics of black-and-white. Hippies forced warmth; punks cultivate cool . Hippies kidded themselves about free love ; punks pretend that s&m is our condition. As symbols of protest, swastikas are no less fatuous than flowers. — Robert Christgau in Christgau's Record Guide (1981) [9] Technical accessibility and a do it yourself (DIY) spirit are prized in punk rock. UK pub rock from 1972 to 1975 contributed to the emergence of punk rock by developing a network of small venues, such as pubs, where non-mainstream bands could play. [10] Pub rock also introduced the idea of independent record labels , such as Stiff Records , which put out basic, low-cost records. [10] Pub rock bands organized their own small venue tours and put out small pressings of their records. In the early days of punk rock, this DIY ethic stood in marked contrast to what those in the scene regarded as the ostentatious musical effects and technological demands of many mainstream rock bands. [11] Musical virtuosity was often looked on with suspicion. According to Holmstrom, punk rock was "rock and roll by people who didn't have very many skills as musicians but still felt the need to express themselves through music". [7] In December 1976, the English fanzine Sideburns published a now-famous illustration of three chords, captioned "This is a chord, this is another, this is a third. Now form a band". [12] British punk rejected contemporary mainstream rock, the broader culture it represented, and their musical predecessors: "No Elvis , Beatles or the Rolling Stones in 1977", declared the Clash song "1977". [13] 1976, when the punk revolution began in Britain, became a musical and a cultural "Year Zero". [14] As nostalgia was discarded, many in the scene adopted a nihilistic attitude summed up by the Sex Pistols ' slogan "No Future"; [5] in the later words of one observer, amid the unemployment and social unrest in 1977, "punk's nihilistic swagger was the most thrilling thing in England." [15] While "self-imposed alienation " was common among "drunk punks" and "gutter punks", there was always a tension between their nihilistic outlook and the "radical leftist utopianism" [16] of bands such as Crass , who found positive, liberating meaning in the movement. As a Clash associate describes singer Joe Strummer 's outlook, "Punk rock is meant to be our freedom. We're meant to be able to do what we want to do." [17] Authenticity has always been important in the punk subculture—the pejorative term " poseur " is applied to those who adopt its stylistic attributes but do not actually share or understand its underlying values and philosophy. Scholar Daniel S. Traber argues that "attaining authenticity in the punk identity can be difficult"; as the punk scene matured, he observes, eventually "everyone got called a poseur". [18] Musical and lyrical elements[ edit ] The early punk bands emulated the minimal musical arrangements of 1960s garage rock . [19] Typical punk rock instrumentation is stripped down to one or two guitars, bass, drums and vocals. Songs tend to be shorter than those of other rock genres and played at fast tempos. [20] Most early punk rock songs retained a traditional rock 'n' roll verse-chorus form and 4/4 time signature . However, later bands often broke from this format. [21] The vocals are sometimes nasal, [22] and the lyrics often shouted in an "arrogant snarl", rather than conventionally sung. [23] [24] Complicated guitar solos were considered self-indulgent, although basic guitar breaks were common. [25] Guitar parts tend to include highly distorted power chords or barre chords , creating a characteristic sound described by Christgau as a "buzzsaw drone". [26] Some punk rock bands take a surf rock approach with a lighter, twangier guitar tone. Others, such as Robert Quine , lead guitarist of the Voidoids , have employed a wild, " gonzo " attack, a style that stretches back through the Velvet Underground to the 1950s recordings of Ike Turner . [27] Bass guitar lines are often uncomplicated; the quintessential approach is a relentless, repetitive "forced rhythm", [28] although some punk rock bass players—such as Mike Watt of the Minutemen and Firehose —emphasize more technical bass lines. Bassists often use a pick due to the rapid succession of notes, making fingerpicking impractical. Drums typically sound heavy and dry, and often have a minimal set-up. Compared to other forms of rock, syncopation is much less the rule. [29] Hardcore drumming tends to be especially fast. [23] Production tends to be minimalistic, with tracks sometimes laid down on home tape recorders [30] or four-track portastudios. [31] Punk rock lyrics are typically blunt and confrontational; compared to the lyrics of other popular music genres, they often focus on social and political issues. [32] Trend-setting songs such as the Clash's " Career Opportunities " and Chelsea 's "Right to Work" deal with unemployment and the grim realities of urban life. [33] Especially in early British punk, a central goal was to outrage and shock the mainstream. [34] The Sex Pistols' " Anarchy in the U.K. " and " God Save the Queen " openly disparaged the British political system and social mores. Anti-sentimental depictions of relationships and sex are common, as in "Love Comes in Spurts", recorded by the Voidoids . Anomie , variously expressed in the poetic terms of Richard Hell's " Blank Generation " and the bluntness of the Ramones' " Now I Wanna Sniff Some Glue ", is a common theme. [35] The controversial content of punk lyrics has frequently led to certain punk records being banned by radio stations and refused shelf space in major chain stores. [36] Christgau said that "Punk is so tied up with the disillusions of growing up that punks do often age poorly." [37] Visual and other elements[ edit ] Further information: Punk fashion 1980s punks with leather jackets and dyed mohawk hairstyles The classic punk rock look among male American musicians harkens back to the T-shirt, motorcycle jacket, and jeans ensemble favored by American greasers of the 1950s associated with the rockabilly scene and by British rockers of the 1960s. In addition to the T-shirt, and leather jackets they wore ripped jeans and boots, typically Doc Martens . The punk look was inspired to shock people. Richard Hell 's more androgynous, ragamuffin look—and reputed invention of the safety-pin aesthetic —was a major influence on Sex Pistols impresario Malcolm McLaren and, in turn, British punk style. [38] [39] ( John D Morton of Cleveland's Electric Eels may have been the first rock musician to wear a safety-pin-covered jacket.) [40] McLaren's partner, fashion designer Vivienne Westwood , credits Johnny Rotten as the first British punk musician to rip his shirt, and Sex Pistols bassist Sid Vicious as the first to use safety pins, [41] although few of those following punk could afford to buy McLaren and Westwood's designs so famously worn by the Pistols, so they made their own, diversifying the 'look' with various different styles based on these designs. Young women in punk demolished the typical female types in rock of either "coy sex kittens or wronged blues belters" in their fashion. [42] Early female punk musicians displayed styles ranging from Siouxsie Sioux 's bondage gear to Patti Smith 's "straight-from-the-gutter androgyny". [43] The former proved much more influential on female fan styles. [44] Over time, tattoos, piercings , and metal-studded and -spiked accessories became increasingly common elements of punk fashion among both musicians and fans, a "style of adornment calculated to disturb and outrage". [45] Among the other facets of the punk rock scene, a punk's hair is an important way of showing their freedom of expression. [46] The typical male punk haircut was originally short and choppy; the mohawk later emerged as a characteristic style. [47] Along with the mohawk, long spikes have been associated with the punk rock genre. [46] 1960s–1973: Precursors[ edit ] See also: garage rock , mod (subculture) , and beat music The early to mid-1960s garage rock bands in the United States and elsewhere are often recognized as punk rock's progenitors. the Kingsmen 's " Louie, Louie " is often cited as punk rock's defining " ur-text ". [48] [nb 1] After the success of the British Invasion , the garage phenomenon gathered momentum around the US. [51] By 1965, the harder-edged sound of British acts, such as the Rolling Stones , the Kinks , and the Who , became increasingly influential with American garage bands. [52] The raw sound of U.S. groups such as the Sonics and the Seeds predicted the style of later acts. [52] In the early 1970s some rock critics used the term "punk rock" to refer to the mid-1960s garage genre, [24] as well as for subsequent acts perceived to be in that stylistic tradition, such as the Stooges. [53] In Britain, largely under the influence of the mod movement and beat groups, the Kinks' 1964 hit singles " You Really Got Me " and " All Day and All of the Night ", were both influenced by "Louie, Louie". [54] [nb 2] In 1965, the Who released the mod anthem " My Generation ", which according to John Reed, anticipated the kind of "cerebral mix of musical ferocity and rebellious posture" that would characterize much of the later British punk rock of the 1970s. [56] [nb 3] The garage/beat phenomenon extended beyond North America and Britain. [58] In America, the psychedelic rock movement birthed an array of garage bands that would later become influences on punk, the Austin Chronicle described the 13th Floor Elevators as a band who can lay claim to influencing the movement, "the seeds of punk remain blatant in the howling ultimatum Erickson transferred from his previous teen combo to the Elevators" [59] as well as describing other bands in the Houston, Texas psychedelic rock scene as "a prime example of the opaque proto-punk undertow at the heart of the best psychedelia ". Hippie proto-punk David Peel of New York City's Lower East Side was the first person to use the word " motherfucker " in a song title and also directly influenced the Clash . [60] Main article: proto-punk In August 1969, the Stooges , from Ann Arbor , premiered with a self-titled album . According to critic Greil Marcus , the band, led by singer Iggy Pop , created "the sound of Chuck Berry 's Airmobile —after thieves stripped it for parts". [61] The album was produced by John Cale , a former member of New York's experimental rock group the Velvet Underground , who inspired many of those involved in the creation of punk rock. [62] The New York Dolls updated 1950s' rock 'n' roll in a fashion that later became known as glam punk . [63] The New York duo Suicide played spare, experimental music with a confrontational stage act inspired by that of the Stooges. [64] In Boston, the Modern Lovers , led by Jonathan Richman , minimalistic style gained attention. In 1974, as well, the Detroit band Death —made up of three African-American brothers—recorded "scorching blasts of feral ur-punk", but could not arrange a release deal. [65] In Ohio, a small but influential underground rock scene emerged, led by Devo in Akron [66] and Kent and by Cleveland's Electric Eels , Mirrors and Rocket from the Tombs . Bands anticipating the forthcoming movement were appearing as far afield as Düsseldorf , West Germany, where "punk before punk" band Neu! formed in 1971, building on the Krautrock tradition of groups such as Can . [67] In Japan, the anti-establishment Zunō Keisatsu (Brain Police) mixed garage-psych and folk . The combo regularly faced censorship challenges, their live act at least once including onstage masturbation. [68] A new generation of Australian garage rock bands, inspired mainly by the Stooges and MC5 , was coming closer to the sound that would soon be called "punk": In Brisbane , the Saints evoked the live sound of the British Pretty Things , who had toured Australia and New Zealand in 1975. [69] Etymology[ edit ] Between the late 16th and the 18th centuries, punk was a common, coarse synonym for prostitute ; William Shakespeare used it with that meaning in The Merry Wives of Windsor (1602) and Measure for Measure (1603–4). [70] The term eventually came to describe "a young male hustler, a gangster, a hoodlum, or a ruffian". [71] The first known use of the phrase "punk rock" appeared in the Chicago Tribune on March 22, 1970, when Ed Sanders , co-founder of New York's anarcho-prankster band the Fugs described his first solo album as "punk rock – redneck sentimentality". [72] [73] In 1969 Sanders recorded a song for an album called "Street Punk" but it was only released in 2008. [72] In the December 1970 issue of Creem , Lester Bangs , mocking more mainstream rock musicians, ironically referred to Iggy Pop as "that Stooge punk". [74] Suicide 's Alan Vega credits this usage with inspiring his duo to bill its gigs as "punk music" or a "punk mass" for the next couple of years. [75] In the March 1971 issue of Creem, critic Greg Shaw wrote about the Shadows of Knight 's "hard-edge punk sound". In an April 1971 issue of Rolling Stone , he referred to a track by the Guess Who as "good, not too imaginative, punk rock and roll". The same month John Medelsohn described Alice Cooper 's album Love It to Death as "nicely wrought mainstream punk raunch". [76] Dave Marsh used the term in the May 1971 issue of Creem , where he described ? and the Mysterians as giving a "landmark exposition of punk rock". [77] Later in 1971, in his fanzine Who Put the Bomp , Greg Shaw wrote about "what I have chosen to call "punkrock" bands—white teenage hard rock of '64–66 ( Standells , Kingsmen, Shadows of Knight , etc.)". [78] [nb 4] Lester Bangs used the term "punk rock" in several articles written in the early 1970s to refer to mid-1960s garage acts. [80] In the liner notes of the 1972 anthology LP, Nuggets , musician and rock journalist Lenny Kaye , later a member of the Patti Smith Group, used the term "punk rock" to describe the genre of 1960s garage bands and "garage-punk", to describe a song recorded in 1966 by the Shadows of Knight. [81] Nick Kent referred to Iggy Pop as the "Punk Messiah of the Teenage Wasteland" in his review of the Stooges July, 1972 performance at King's Cross Cinema in London for a British magazine called Cream (no relation to the more famous US publication). [82] In the January 1973 Rolling Stone review of Nuggets, Greg Shaw commented "Punk rock is a fascinating genre... Punk rock at its best is the closest we came in the '60s to the original rockabilly spirit of Rock 'n Roll." [83] In February 1973, Terry Atkinson of the Los Angeles Times , reviewing the debut album by a hard rock band, Aerosmith , declared that it "achieves all that punk-rock bands strive for but most miss." [84] A March 1973 review of an Iggy and the Stooges show in the Detroit Free Press dismissively referred to Pop as "the apotheosis of Detroit punk music". [85] In May 1973, Billy Altman launched the short-lived punk magazine in Buffalo, NY which was largely devoted to discussion of 1960s garage and psychedelic acts. [86] [87] Iggy Pop , the "godfather of punk" [88] In May 1974, Los Angeles Times critic Robert Hilburn reviewed the second New York Dolls album, Too Much Too Soon . "I told ya the New York Dolls were the real thing," he wrote, describing the album as "perhaps the best example of raw, thumb-your-nose-at-the-world, punk rock since the Rolling Stones ' Exile on Main Street ." [89] In a 1974 interview for his fanzine Heavy Metal Digest, Danny Sugerman told Iggy Pop "You went on record as saying you never were a punk" and Iggy replied "...well I ain't. I never was a punk." [90] By 1975, punk was being used to describe acts as diverse as the Patti Smith Group , the Bay City Rollers , and Bruce Springsteen . [91] As the scene at New York's CBGB club attracted notice, a name was sought for the developing sound. Club owner Hilly Kristal called the movement "Street rock"; John Holmstrom credits Aquarian magazine with using punk "to describe what was going on at CBGBs". [92] Holmstrom, Legs McNeil , and Ged Dunn's magazine Punk , which debuted at the end of 1975, was crucial in codifying the term. [93] "It was pretty obvious that the word was getting very popular", Holmstrom later remarked. "We figured we'd take the name before anyone else claimed it. We wanted to get rid of the bullshit, strip it down to rock 'n' roll. We wanted the fun and liveliness back." [91] 1974–1976: First wave[ edit ] New York City[ edit ] Facade of legendary music club CBGB , New York The origins of New York's punk rock scene can be traced back to such sources as the late 1960s trash culture and an early 1970s underground rock movement centered on the Mercer Arts Center in Greenwich Village , where the New York Dolls performed. [94] In early 1974, a new scene began to develop around the CBGB club, also in Lower Manhattan . At its core was Television , described by critic John Walker as "the ultimate garage band with pretensions". [95] Their influences ranged from The Velvet Underground to the staccato guitar work of Dr. Feelgood 's Wilko Johnson . [96] The band's bassist/singer, Richard Hell , created a look with cropped, ragged hair, ripped T-shirts, and black leather jackets credited as the basis for punk rock visual style. [97] In April 1974, Patti Smith came to CBGB for the first time to see the band perform. [98] A veteran of independent theater and performance poetry, Smith was developing an intellectual, feminist take on rock 'n' roll. On June 5, she recorded the single " Hey Joe "/" Piss Factory ", featuring Television guitarist Tom Verlaine ; released on her own Mer Records label, it heralded the scene's DIY ethic and has often been cited as the first punk rock record. [99] By August, Smith and Television were gigging together at Max's Kansas City . [97] The Ramones performing in Toronto in 1976. The Ramones are often described as the first true punk band, popularizing the punk movement in the United States. They are regarded as highly influential in today's punk culture . In Forest Hills, Queens , the Ramones drew on sources ranging from the Stooges to the Beatles and the Beach Boys to Herman's Hermits and 1960s girl groups , and condensed rock 'n' roll to its primal level: "'1–2–3–4!' bass-player Dee Dee Ramone shouted at the start of every song as if the group could barely master the rudiments of rhythm." [100] The band played its first show at CBGB in August 1974. [101] By the end of the year, the Ramones had performed seventy-four shows, each about seventeen minutes long. [102] "When I first saw the Ramones", critic Mary Harron later remembered, "I couldn't believe people were doing this. The dumb brattiness." [103] That spring, Smith and Television shared a two-month-long weekend residency at CBGB that significantly raised the club's profile. [106] The Television sets included Richard Hell's "Blank Generation", which became the scene's emblematic anthem. [107] Soon after, Hell left Television and founded a band featuring a more stripped-down sound, the Heartbreakers , with former New York Dolls Johnny Thunders and Jerry Nolan . [38] In August, Television recorded a single, "Little Johnny Jewel". In the words of John Walker, the record was "a turning point for the whole New York scene" if not quite for the punk rock sound itself — Hell's departure had left the band "significantly reduced in fringe aggression". [95] Early in 1976, Hell left the Heartbreakers to form the Voidoids , described as "one of the most harshly uncompromising [punk] bands". [108] That April, the Ramones' debut album was released by Sire Records ; the first single was " Blitzkrieg Bop ", opening with the rallying cry "Hey! Ho! Let's go!" According to a later description, "Like all cultural watersheds, Ramones was embraced by a discerning few and slagged off as a bad joke by the uncomprehending majority." [109] The Cramps , whose core members were from Sacramento, California and Akron, Ohio , had debuted at CBGB in November 1976, opening for the Dead Boys. They were soon playing regularly at Max's Kansas City and CBGB. [110] At this early stage, the term punk applied to the scene in general, not necessarily a particular stylistic approach as it would later—the early New York punk bands represented a broad variety of influences. Among them, the Ramones, the Heartbreakers, Richard Hell and the Voidoids, and the Dead Boys were establishing a distinct musical style. Even where they diverged most clearly, in lyrical approach — the Ramones' apparent guilelessness at one extreme, Hell's conscious craft at the other — there was an abrasive attitude in common. Their shared attributes of minimalism and speed, however, had not yet come to define punk rock. [111] "Anarchy in the U.K." With its "inflammatory, venomous lyrics [and] crude energy", the Sex Pistols ' debut single " Anarchy in the U.K. " "established punk's modus operandi". [112] Producer Chris Thomas layered multiple tracks of Steve Jones 's guitar to create a "searing wall of sound", [113] while Johnny Rotten spewed the vocals "as if his teeth had been ground down to points." [114] Problems playing this file? See media help . After a brief period unofficially managing the New York Dolls, Briton Malcolm McLaren returned to London in May 1975, inspired by the new scene he had witnessed at CBGB. The King's Road clothing store he co-owned, recently renamed Sex , was building a reputation with its outrageous "anti-fashion". [115] Among those who frequented the shop were members of a band called the Strand, which McLaren had also been managing. In August, the group was seeking a new lead singer. Another Sex habitué, Johnny Rotten , auditioned for and won the job. Adopting a new name, the group played its first gig as the Sex Pistols on 6 November 1975, at Saint Martin's School of Art , and soon attracted a small but dedicated following. [116] In February 1976, the band received its first significant press coverage; guitarist Steve Jones declared that the Sex Pistols were not so much into music as they were "chaos". [117] The band often provoked its crowds into near-riots. Rotten announced to one audience, "Bet you don't hate us as much as we hate you!" [118] McLaren envisioned the Sex Pistols as central players in a new youth movement, "hard and tough". [119] As described by critic Jon Savage , the band members "embodied an attitude into which McLaren fed a new set of references: late-sixties radical politics, sexual fetish material, pop history, [...] youth sociology". [120] The Clash performing in 1980 Bernard Rhodes , an associate of McLaren, similarly aimed to make stars of the band London SS , who became the Clash , which was joined by Joe Strummer . [121] On 4 June 1976, the Sex Pistols played Manchester's Lesser Free Trade Hall in what became one of the most influential rock shows ever. Among the approximately forty audience members were the two locals who organised the gig—they had formed Buzzcocks after seeing the Sex Pistols in February. Others in the small crowd went on to form Joy Division , the Fall , and — in the 1980s — the Smiths . [122] In July, the Ramones played two London shows that helped spark the nascent UK punk scene. [123] Over the next several months, many new punk rock bands formed, often directly inspired by the Sex Pistols. [124] In London, women were near the center of the scene—among the initial wave of bands were the female-fronted Siouxsie and the Banshees , X-Ray Spex , and the all-female the Slits . There were female bassists Gaye Advert in the Adverts and Shanne Bradley in the Nipple Erectors , while Sex store frontwoman Jordan not only managed Adam and the Ants but also performed screaming vocals on their song "Lou". Other groups included Subway Sect , Alternative TV , Wire , the Stranglers , Eater and Generation X . Farther afield, Sham 69 began practicing in the southeastern town of Hersham . In Durham , there was Penetration , with lead singer Pauline Murray . On September 20–21, the 100 Club Punk Festival in London featured the Sex Pistols, Clash, Damned, and Buzzcocks, as well as Paris's female-lead Stinky Toys . Siouxsie and the Banshees and Subway Sect debuted on the festival's first night. On the festival's second night, audience member Sid Vicious was arrested for having thrown a glass at the Damned that shattered and destroyed a girl's eye. Press coverage of the incident reinforced punk's reputation as a social menace. [125] Some new bands, such as London's Ultravox! , Edinburgh's Rezillos , Manchester's the Fall, and Leamington 's the Shapes , identified with the scene even as they pursued more experimental music. Others of a comparatively traditional rock 'n' roll bent were also swept up by the movement: the Vibrators , formed as a pub rock–style act in February 1976, soon adopted a punk look and sound. [126] A few even longer-active bands including Surrey neo-mods the Jam and pub rockers Eddie and the Hot Rods , the Stranglers , and Cock Sparrer also became associated with the punk rock scene. Alongside the musical roots shared with their American counterparts and the calculated confrontationalism of the early Who , the British punks also reflected the influence of glam rock and related artists and bands such as David Bowie , Slade , T.Rex , and Roxy Music . [127] However, Sex Pistols frontman Johnny Rotten (real name John Lydon) insisted that the influences of the UK punk scene were not from the US and NY. "I’ve heard an awful lot of American journalists pretending that the whole punk influence came out of New York." He argued: "T. Rex, David Bowie, Slade, Mott The Hoople , the Alex Harvey Band — their influence was enormous. And they try to write that all off and wrap it around Patti Smith. It’s so wrong!". [128] In October 1976, the Damned released the first UK punk rock band single, " New Rose ". [129] The Vibrators followed the next month with "We Vibrate". On 26 November 1976, the Sex Pistols' released their debut single " Anarchy in the U.K. ", which succeeded in its goal of becoming a "national scandal". [130] Jamie Reid 's "anarchy flag" poster and his other design work for the Sex Pistols helped establish a distinctive punk visual aesthetic . [131] On 1 December 1976, an incident took place that sealed punk rock's notorious reputation, when the Sex Pistols and several members of the Bromley Contingent , including Siouxsie Sioux and Steven Severin , filled a vacancy for Queen on the early evening Thames Television London television show Today to be interviewed by host Bill Grundy . When Grundy asked Siouxsie how she was doing, she made fun of him saying, "I've always wanted to meet you, Bill". Grundy  who was drunk, told her on the air; "we shall meet afterwards then". This instantly generated a reaction from Sex Pistols guitarist Steve Jones who pronounced a series of terms inappropriate for prime-time television. [132] Jones proceeded to call Grundy a "dirty bastard", a "dirty fucker", and a "fucking rotter", triggering a media controversy. [133] The episode had a major impact on the history of the scene and the punk term became a household name in 24 hours thanks to the press coverage, and several front covers of newspapers. [132] Two days later, the Sex Pistols, the Clash, the Damned, and the Heartbreakers set out on the Anarchy Tour, a series of gigs throughout the UK. Many of the shows were cancelled by venue owners in response to the media outrage following the Grundy interview. [134] Australia[ edit ] A punk subculture began in Australia around the same time, centered around Radio Birdman and the Oxford Tavern in Sydney's Darlinghurst suburb. By 1976, the Saints were hiring Brisbane local halls to use as venues, or playing in "Club 76", their shared house in the inner suburb of Petrie Terrace . The band soon discovered that musicians were exploring similar paths in other parts of the world. Ed Kuepper , co-founder of the Saints, later recalled: One thing I remember having had a really depressing effect on me was the first Ramones album. When I heard it [in 1976], I mean it was a great record [...] but I hated it because I knew we'd been doing this sort of stuff for years. There was even a chord progression on that album that we used [...] and I thought, "Fuck. We're going to be labeled as influenced by the Ramones", when nothing could have been further from the truth. [135] In Perth , the Cheap Nasties formed in August. [136] In September 1976, the Saints became the first punk rock band outside the U.S. to release a recording, the single " (I'm) Stranded ". The band self-financed, packaged, and distributed the single. [137] "(I'm) Stranded" had limited impact at home, but the British music press recognized it as groundbreaking. [138] 1977–1978: Second wave[ edit ] A second wave of punk rock emerged in 1977. These bands often sounded very different from each other. [139] While punk remained largely an underground phenomenon in the US, in the UK it had become a major sensation. [140] [141] During this period punk music also spread beyond the English speaking world, inspiring local scenes in other countries. The California punk scene was fully developed by early 1977. In Los Angeles, there were: the Weirdos , the Zeros , the Bags , Black Randy and the Metrosquad , the Germs , Fear , The Go-Go's , X , the Dickies , and the relocated Tupperwares, now dubbed the Screamers . [142] Black Flag formed in Hermosa Beach in 1976 under the name Panic. They developed a hardcore punk sound and played their debut public performance in a garage in Redondo Beach in December 1977. [143] San Francisco's second wave included the Avengers , The Nuns , Negative Trend , the Mutants , and the Sleepers. [144] By mid-1977 in downtown New York, bands such as Teenage Jesus and the Jerks led what became known as no wave . [145] The Misfits formed in nearby New Jersey. Still developing what would become their signature B movie –inspired style, later dubbed horror punk , they made their first appearance at CBGB in April 1977. [146] The Misfits developed a " horror punk " style in New Jersey. The Dead Boys' debut LP, Young, Loud and Snotty , was released at the end of August. [147] October saw two more debut albums from the scene: Richard Hell and the Voidoids' first full-length, Blank Generation , and the Heartbreakers' L.A.M.F. [148] One track on the latter exemplified both the scene's close-knit character and the popularity of heroin within it: " Chinese Rocks " — the title refers to a strong form of the drug — was written by Dee Dee Ramone and Hell, both users, as were the Heartbreakers' Thunders and Nolan. [149] (During the Heartbreakers' 1976 and 1977 tours of Britain, Thunders played a central role in popularizing heroin among the punk crowd there, as well.) [150] The Ramones' third album, Rocket to Russia , appeared in November 1977. [151] United Kingdom[ edit ] The Sex Pistols ' live TV skirmish with Bill Grundy on December 1, 1976, was the signal moment in British punk 's transformation into a major media phenomenon, even as some stores refused to stock the records and radio airplay was hard to come by. [152] Press coverage of punk misbehavior grew intense: On January 4, 1977, The Evening News of London ran a front-page story on how the Sex Pistols "vomited and spat their way to an Amsterdam flight". [153] In February 1977, the first album by a British punk band appeared: Damned Damned Damned (by the Damned) reached number thirty-six on the UK chart. The EP Spiral Scratch , self-released by Manchester's Buzzcocks , was a benchmark for both the DIY ethic and regionalism in the country's punk movement. [154] The Clash 's self-titled debut album came out two months later and rose to number twelve; the single " White Riot " entered the top forty. In May, the Sex Pistols achieved new heights of controversy (and number two on the singles chart) with " God Save the Queen ". The band had recently acquired a new bassist, Sid Vicious , who was seen as exemplifying the punk persona. [155] The swearing during the Grundy interview and the controversy over "God Save the Queen" led to a moral panic . [156] Scores of new punk groups formed around the United Kingdom, as far from London as Belfast 's Stiff Little Fingers and Dunfermline , Scotland's the Skids . [157] Though most survived only briefly, perhaps recording a small-label single or two, others set off new trends. Crass , from Essex , merged a vehement, straight-ahead punk rock style with a committed anarchist mission, and played a major role in the emerging anarcho-punk movement. [158] Sham 69, London's Menace, and the Angelic Upstarts from South Shields in the Northeast combined a similarly stripped-down sound with populist lyrics, a style that became known as street punk . These expressly working-class bands contrasted with others in the second wave that presaged the post-punk phenomenon. Liverpool's first punk group, Big in Japan , moved in a glam, theatrical direction. [159] The band did not survive long, but it spun off several well-known post-punk acts. [160] The songs of London's Wire were characterized by sophisticated lyrics, minimalist arrangements, and extreme brevity. [161] Alongside thirteen original songs that would define classic punk rock, the Clash's debut had included a cover of the recent Jamaican reggae hit " Police and Thieves ". [162] Other first wave bands such as the Slits and new entrants to the scene like the Ruts and the Police interacted with the reggae and ska subcultures, incorporating their rhythms and production styles. The punk rock phenomenon helped spark a full-fledged ska revival movement known as 2 Tone , centered on bands such as the Specials , the Beat , Madness , and the Selecter . [163] In July, the Sex Pistols' third single, " Pretty Vacant ", reached number six and Australia's the Saints had a top-forty hit with " This Perfect Day ". [164] In September, Generation X and the Clash reached the top forty with, respectively, "Your Generation" and " Complete Control ". X-Ray Spex's " Oh Bondage Up Yours! " did not chart, but it became a requisite item for punk fans. [165] The BBC banned "Oh Bondage Up Yours!" due to its controversial lyrics. [166] In October, the Sex Pistols hit number eight with " Holidays in the Sun ", followed by the release of their first and only "official" album, Never Mind the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols . Inspiring yet another round of controversy, it topped the British charts. In December, one of the first books about punk rock was published: The Boy Looked at Johnny, by Julie Burchill and Tony Parsons . [nb 5] Australia[ edit ] In February 1977, EMI released the Saints ' debut album, (I'm) Stranded , which the band recorded in two days. [167] The Saints had relocated to Sydney; in April, they and Radio Birdman united for a major gig at Paddington Town Hall . [168] Last Words had also formed in the city. The following month, the Saints relocated again, to Great Britain. In June, Radio Birdman released the album Radios Appear on its own Trafalgar label. [169] 1979–1984: Schism and diversification[ edit ] Flipper , performing in 1984 By 1979, the hardcore punk movement was emerging in Southern California . A rivalry developed between adherents of the new sound and the older punk rock crowd. Hardcore, appealing to a younger, more suburban audience, was perceived by some as anti-intellectual, overly violent, and musically limited. In Los Angeles, the opposing factions were often described as "Hollywood punks" and "beach punks", referring to Hollywood's central position in the original L.A. punk rock scene and to hardcore's popularity in the shoreline communities of South Bay and Orange County . [170] In contrast to North America, more of the bands from the original British punk movement remained active, sustaining extended careers even as their styles evolved and diverged. Meanwhile, the Oi! and anarcho-punk movements were emerging. Musically in the same aggressive vein as American hardcore, they addressed different constituencies with overlapping but distinct anti-establishment messages. As described by Dave Laing, "The model for self-proclaimed punk after 1978 derived from the Ramones via the eight-to-the-bar rhythms most characteristic of the Vibrators and Clash [...] It became essential to sound one particular way to be recognized as a 'punk band' now." [171] In February 1979, former Sex Pistols bassist Sid Vicious died of a heroin overdose in New York. If the Sex Pistols' breakup the previous year had marked the end of the original UK punk scene and its promise of cultural transformation, for many the death of Vicious signified that it had been doomed from the start. [172] By the turn of the decade, the punk rock movement had split deeply along cultural and musical lines. The "Great Schism" of punk occurred right as the 1980s were approaching, when melodic new wave artists began to separate themselves from hardcore punk . This left a variety of derivative scenes and forms. On one side were new wave and post-punk artists; some adopted more accessible musical styles and gained broad popularity, while some turned in more experimental, less commercial directions. On the other side, hardcore punk, Oi!, and anarcho-punk bands became closely linked with underground cultures and spun off an array of subgenres . [173] Somewhere in between, pop-punk groups created blends like that of the ideal record, as defined by Mekons cofounder Kevin Lycett: "a cross between Abba and the Sex Pistols". [174] A range of other styles emerged, many of them fusions with long-established genres. The Clash album London Calling , released in December 1979, exemplified the breadth of classic punk's legacy. Combining punk rock with reggae, ska, R&B, and rockabilly, it went on to be acclaimed as one of the best rock records ever. [175] At the same time, as observed by Flipper singer Bruce Loose, the relatively restrictive hardcore scenes diminished the variety of music that could once be heard at many punk gigs. [139] If early punk, like most rock scenes, was ultimately male-oriented, the hardcore and Oi! scenes were significantly more so, marked in part by the slam dancing and moshing with which they became identified. [176] Main article: New wave music Debbie Harry performing in Toronto in 1977 In 1976—first in London, then in the United States—"New Wave" was introduced as a complementary label for the formative scenes and groups also known as "punk"; the two terms were essentially interchangeable. [177] NME journalist Roy Carr is credited with proposing the term's use (adopted from the cinematic French New Wave of the 1960s) in this context. [178] Over time, "new wave" acquired a distinct meaning: bands such as Blondie and Talking Heads from the CBGB scene; the Cars , who emerged from the Rat in Boston; the Go-Go's in Los Angeles; and the Police in London that were broadening their instrumental palette, incorporating dance-oriented rhythms, and working with more polished production were specifically designated "new wave" and no longer called "punk". Dave Laing suggests that some punk-identified British acts pursued the new wave label in order to avoid radio censorship and make themselves more palatable to concert bookers. [179] Bringing elements of punk rock music and fashion into more pop-oriented, less "dangerous" styles, new wave artists became very popular on both sides of the Atlantic. [180] New wave became a catch-all term, [181] encompassing disparate styles such as 2 Tone ska, the mod revival inspired by the Jam , the sophisticated pop-rock of Elvis Costello and XTC , the New Romantic phenomenon typified by Ultravox , synthpop groups like Tubeway Army (which had started out as a straight-ahead punk band) and Human League , and the sui generis subversions of Devo , who had gone "beyond punk before punk even properly existed". [182] New wave crossed into the mainstream with the debut of the cable television network MTV in 1981, which put many new wave videos into regular rotation. [183] According to Stuart Borthwick and Ron Moy, authors of Popular Music Genres: an Introduction, the "height of popularity for new wave" coincided with the election of Margaret Thatcher in spring 1979. [184] Main article: Post-punk During 1976–1977, in the midst of the original UK punk movement, bands emerged such as Manchester's Joy Division , the Fall , and Magazine , Leeds' Gang of Four , and London's the Raincoats that became central post-punk figures. Some bands classified as post-punk, such as Throbbing Gristle and Cabaret Voltaire , had been active well before the punk scene coalesced; [185] others, such as Siouxsie and the Banshees and the Slits , transitioned from punk rock into post-punk. A few months after the Sex Pistols' breakup, John Lydon (no longer "Rotten") cofounded Public Image Ltd . Lora Logic , formerly of X-Ray Spex, founded Essential Logic . Killing Joke formed in 1979. These bands were often musically experimental; the term "post-punk" is used to describe sounds that were more dark and abrasive—sometimes verging on the atonal , as with Subway Sect and Wire. The bands incorporated a range of influences ranging from Syd Barrett , Captain Beefheart , David Bowie to Roxy Music to Krautrock . Post-punk brought together a new fraternity of musicians, journalists, managers, and entrepreneurs; the latter, notably Geoff Travis of Rough Trade and Tony Wilson of Factory , helped to develop the production and distribution infrastructure of the indie music scene that blossomed in the mid-1980s. [186] Smoothing the edges of their style in the direction of new wave, several post-punk bands such as New Order and the Cure crossed over to a mainstream U.S. audience. Others, like Gang of Four, the Raincoats, and Throbbing Gristle, who had little more than cult followings at the time, are seen in retrospect as significant influences on modern popular culture. [187] Television's debut album Marquee Moon , released in 1977, is frequently cited as a seminal album in the field. [188] The no wave movement that developed in New York in the late 1970s, with artists such as Lydia Lunch and James Chance , is often treated as the phenomenon's U.S. parallel. [189] The later work of Ohio protopunk pioneers Pere Ubu is also commonly described as post-punk. [190] One of the most influential American post-punk bands was Boston's Mission of Burma , who brought abrupt rhythmic shifts derived from hardcore into a highly experimental musical context. [191] In 1980, Australia's Boys Next Door moved to London and changed their name to the Birthday Party , which evolved into Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds . Led by the Primitive Calculators , Melbourne's Little Band scene further explored the possibilities of post-punk. [192] The original post-punk bands were highly influential on 1990s and 2000s alternative rock musicians. [193] Main article: Hardcore punk Bad Brains at 9:30 Club, Washington, D.C., 1983 A distinctive style of punk, characterized by superfast, aggressive beats, screaming vocals , and often politically aware lyrics, began to emerge in 1978 among bands scattered around the United States and Canada. The first major scene of what came to be known as hardcore punk developed in Southern California in 1978–79, initially around such punk bands as the Germs and Fear . [194] The movement soon spread around North America and internationally. [195] [196] According to author Steven Blush , "Hardcore comes from the bleak suburbs of America. Parents moved their kids out of the cities to these horrible suburbs to save them from the 'reality' of the cities and what they ended up with was this new breed of monster". [21] In 1981, hardcore punk was exposed to mainstream television audiences following a live performance from Fear on Saturday Night Live , which prompted a live-broadcast riot and mosh pit , which included members of the emerging hardcore scene such as Ian MacKaye , Harley Flanagan , Tesco Vee , and John Brannon . [197] [198] Among the earliest hardcore bands, regarded as having made the first recordings in the style, were Southern California's Middle Class and Black Flag . [196] Bad Brains — all of whom were black, a rarity in punk of any era — launched the D.C. scene with their rapid-paced single " Pay to Cum " in 1980. [195] Austin, Texas 's Big Boys , San Francisco's Dead Kennedys , and Vancouver 's D.O.A. were among the other initial hardcore groups.[ citation needed ] They were soon joined by bands such as the Minutemen , Descendents , and Circle Jerks in Southern California; D.C.'s Minor Threat and State of Alert ; and Austin's MDC . By 1981, hardcore was the dominant punk rock style not only in California but much of the rest of North America as well. [199] A New York hardcore scene grew, including the relocated Bad Brains, New Jersey's Misfits and Adrenalin O.D. , and local acts such as the Mob , Reagan Youth , and Agnostic Front . Beastie Boys , who would become famous as a hip-hop group, debuted that year as a hardcore band. They were followed by the Cro-Mags , Murphy's Law , and Leeway . [200] By 1983, St. Paul 's Hüsker Dü , Willful Neglect, Chicago's Naked Raygun , Indianapolis 's Zero Boys , and D.C.'s the Faith were taking the hardcore sound in experimental and ultimately more melodic directions. [201] Hardcore would constitute the American punk rock standard throughout the decade. [202] The lyrical content of hardcore songs is often critical of commercial culture and middle-class values, as in Dead Kennedys' celebrated " Holiday in Cambodia " (1980). [203] Straight edge bands like Minor Threat, Boston 's SS Decontrol , and Reno, Nevada 's 7 Seconds rejected the self-destructive lifestyles of their peers, and built a movement based on positivity and abstinence from cigarettes, alcohol, drugs, and casual sex. [204] Skate punk innovators pointed in other directions: including Venice, California 's Suicidal Tendencies who had a formative effect on the heavy metal –influenced crossover thrash style. Toward the middle of the decade, D.R.I spawned the superfast thrashcore genre. [205] 1985–present: Legacy and revival[ edit ]
Toggle the table of contents Hip hop music From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rhythmic music accompanied by rhyming speech "Hip hop" redirects here. For its cultural origins, see hip hop (culture) . For other uses, see hip hop (disambiguation) . "Rap music" redirects here. For the form of vocal delivery associated with hip hop music, see rapping . For the Killer Mike album, see R.A.P. Music . Hip hop August 11, 1973, The Bronx , New York City, U.S. [2] [3] [4] Typical instruments 2024 in hip hop music Hip-hop or hip hop, also known as rap, and formerly known as disco rap, [7] [8] is a genre of popular music that originated in the early 1970s by African Americans and Caribbean immigrants in the Bronx , [9] [10] [11] [12] a borough of New York City. [13] [14] [15] Hip-hop music originated as an anti-drug and anti-violence genre [16] consisting of stylized rhythmic music (usually built around drum beats ) that often accompanies rapping , a rhythmic delivery of poetic speech. [17] According to the professor Asante of African American studies at Temple University, "hip hop is something that blacks can unequivocally claim as their own". [18] The music developed as part of the broader hip hop culture , a subculture defined by four key stylistic elements: MCing /rapping, DJing/ scratching with turntables , breakdancing , and graffiti art . [19] [20] [21] While often used to refer solely to rapping and rap music, "hip hop" more properly denotes the practice of the entire subculture. [22] [23] The term hip hop music is sometimes used synonymously with the term rap music, [17] [24] though rapping is not a required component of hip hop music; the genre may also incorporate other elements of the culture, including DJing , turntablism , scratching , beatboxing , and instrumental tracks . [25] [26] Hip hop as both a musical genre and a culture was formed during the 1970s when block parties became increasingly popular in New York City, particularly among African American youth residing in the Bronx . [27] At block parties, DJs played percussive breaks of popular songs using two turntables and a DJ mixer to be able to play breaks from two copies of the same record, alternating from one to the other and extending the "break". [28] Hip hop's early evolution occurred as sampling technology and drum machines became widely available and affordable. Turntablist techniques such as scratching and beatmatching developed along with the breaks. Rapping developed as a vocal style in which the artist speaks or chants along rhythmically with an instrumental or synthesized beat . Hip hop music was not officially recorded to play on radio or television until 1979, largely due to poverty during the genre's birth and lack of acceptance outside ghetto neighborhoods. [29] Old-school hip hop was the first mainstream wave of the genre, marked by its disco influence and party-oriented lyrics. The 1980s marked the diversification of hip hop as the genre developed more complex styles and spread around the world. New-school hip hop was the genre's second wave, marked by its electro sound, and led into golden age hip hop , an innovative period between the mid-1980s and mid-1990s that also developed hip hop's own album era . The gangsta rap subgenre , focused on the violent lifestyles and impoverished conditions of inner-city African American youth, gained popularity at this time. West Coast hip hop was dominated by G-funk in the early-mid 1990s, while East Coast hip hop was dominated by jazz rap , alternative hip hop , and hardcore hip hop . Hip hop continued to diversify at this time with other regional styles emerging, such as Southern rap and Atlanta hip hop . Hip hop became a best-selling genre in the mid-1990s and the top-selling music genre by 1999. The popularity of hip hop music continued through the late 1990s to early-2000s "bling era" with hip hop influences increasingly finding their way into other genres of popular music, such as neo soul , nu metal , and R&B . The United States also saw the success of regional styles such as crunk , a Southern genre that emphasized the beats and music more than the lyrics, and alternative hip hop began to secure a place in the mainstream, due in part to the crossover success of its artists. During the late 2000s and early 2010s "blog era", rappers were able to build up a following through online methods of music distribution, such as social media and blogs, and mainstream hip hop took on a more melodic, sensitive direction following the commercial decline of gangsta rap. The trap and mumble rap subgenres have become the most popular form of hip hop during the mid-late 2010s and early 2020s. In 2017, rock music was usurped by hip hop as the most popular genre in the United States. In recent years, hip hop's influence has transcended musical boundaries, impacting fashion, language, and cultural trends worldwide. [30] [31] [32] Amidst its evolution, hip hop has also been a vehicle for social commentary and political expression, reflecting the struggles and aspirations of marginalized communities. From its roots in the Bronx to its global reach today, hip hop has served as a voice for the disenfranchised, shedding light on issues such as racial inequality, poverty, and police brutality. [33] Artists like Public Enemy, Tupac Shakur, and Kendrick Lamar have used their platforms to address systemic injustices, fostering dialogue and inspiring activism. Hip hop's ability to confront societal issues while simultaneously providing a form of empowerment and self-expression has solidified its significance beyond mere entertainment, making it a cultural force to be reckoned with. [34] Origin of the term Afrika Bambaataa with DJ Yutaka of Universal Zulu Nation in 2004 The words "hip" and "hop" in combination have a long history. In the 1950s, older folks referred to teen house parties as "hippity hops". [35] The creation of the term hip hop is often credited to Keef Cowboy , rapper with Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five . [36] However, Lovebug Starski , Keef Cowboy, and DJ Hollywood used the term when the music was still known as disco rap . [37] It is believed that Cowboy created the term while teasing a friend who had just joined the U.S. Army, by scat singing the words "hip/hop/hip/hop" in a way that mimicked the rhythmic cadence of soldiers marching. [36] Cowboy later worked the "hip hop" cadence into a part of his stage performance. For example, he would say something along the lines of  "I said a hip-hop, a hibbit, hibby-dibby, hip-hip-hop and you don't stop", [35] which was quickly used by other artists such as The Sugarhill Gang in " Rapper's Delight ". [36] Universal Zulu Nation founder Afrika Bambaataa , also known as "the Godfather", is credited with first using the term to describe the subculture in which the music belonged; although it is also suggested that it was a derogatory term to describe the type of music. [38] The term was first used in print to refer to the music by reporter Robert Flipping Jr. in a February 1979 article in the New Pittsburgh Courier , [39] [40] and to refer to the culture in a January 1982 interview of Afrika Bambaataa by Michael Holman in the East Village Eye . [41] The term gained further currency in September of that year in another Bambaataa interview in The Village Voice , [42] by Steven Hager , later author of a 1984 history of hip hop. [43] There are disagreements about whether or not the terms "hip hop" and "rap" can be used interchangeably, even amongst its most knowledgeable proponents. [8] The most common view is that hip-hop is a cultural movement that emerged in the South Bronx in New York City during the 1970s, with MCing (or rapping) being one of the primary four elements. [8] Hip hop's other three essential elements are graffiti art (or aerosol art), break dancing, and DJing. Rap music has become by far the most celebrated expression of hip hop culture, due to being the easiest to market to a mass audience. [8] Precursors Musical genres from which hip hop developed include funk , blues , jazz and rhythm and blues recordings from the 1960s, 1950s, and earlier, including several records by Bo Diddley [ citation needed ] and gospel group The Jubalaires , whose 1946 song "Noah" is often named as the first recorded instance of rap . [44] [45] Muhammad Ali 's 1963 spoken-word album I Am the Greatest is regarded by some writers as an early example of hip hop. [46] [47] [ better source needed ] Pigmeat Markham 's 1968 single " Here Comes the Judge " is one of several songs said to be the earliest hip hop record. [48] Leading up to hip hop, there were spoken-word artists such as the Last Poets who released their debut album in 1970, and Gil Scott-Heron , who gained a wide audience with his 1971 track " The Revolution Will Not Be Televised ". These artists combined spoken word and music to create a kind of "proto-rap" vibe. [49] 1973–1979: early years Origins Hip hop as music and culture formed during the 1970s in New York City from the multicultural exchange between African Americans and children of immigrants from countries in the Caribbean , most notably Jamaica . [50] Hip hop music in its infancy has been described as an outlet and a voice for the disenfranchised youth of marginalized backgrounds and low-income areas, as the hip hop culture reflected the social, economic and political realities of their lives. [51] [52] Many of the people who helped establish hip hop culture, including DJ Kool Herc , DJ Disco Wiz , Grandmaster Flash , and Afrika Bambaataa were of Latin American or Caribbean origin. It is hard to pinpoint the exact musical influences that most affected the sound and culture of early hip hop because of the multicultural nature of New York—hip hop's early pioneers were influenced by a mix of cultures, due to the city's diversity. [53] The city experienced a heavy Jamaican hip hop influence during the 1990s. This influence was brought on by cultural shifts particularly because of the heightened immigration of Jamaicans to New York and the American-born Jamaican youth who were coming of age during the 1990s. DJ Kool Herc , of Jamaican background, is recognized as one of the earliest hip hop DJs and artists. Some credit him with officially originating hip hop music through his 1973 "Back to School Jam". [54] In the 1970s, block parties became increasingly popular in New York, particularly among African American, Caribbean and Hispanic youth residing in the Bronx . Block parties incorporated DJs, who played popular genres of music, especially funk and soul music . Due to the positive reception, DJs began isolating the percussive breaks of popular songs. This technique was common in Jamaican dub music , [55] and was largely introduced into New York by immigrants from the Caribbean, including DJ Kool Herc, one of the pioneers of hip hop. [56] [57] Herc has repeatedly denied any direct connections between Jamaican musical traditions and early hip hop, stating that his own biggest influence was James Brown , from whom he says rap originated. [58] Even before moving to the U.S., Herc says his biggest influences came from American music: I was listening to American music in Jamaica and my favorite artist was James Brown. That's who inspired me. A lot of the records I played were by James Brown. [59] Herc also says that he was not influenced by Jamaican sound system parties, as he was too young to experience them when he was in Jamaica. [60] Later in a 2020 interview, Herc stated that he wanted Jamaica to reclaim Hip Hop “because we are the ones who bought the style and the technique to America, which [later] became hip-hop.” [61] Because the percussive breaks in funk, soul and disco records were generally short, Herc and other DJs began using two turntables to extend the breaks. On August 11, 1973, DJ Kool Herc was the DJ at his sister's back-to-school party. He extended the beat of a record by using two record players, isolating the percussion "breaks" by using a mixer to switch between the two records. Herc's experiments with making music with record players became what we now know as breaking or " scratching ". [62] A second key musical element in hip hop music is emceeing (also called MCing or rapping). Emceeing is the rhythmic spoken delivery of rhymes and wordplay, delivered at first without accompaniment and later done over a beats . This spoken style was influenced by the African American style of "capping", a performance where men tried to outdo each other in originality of their language and tried to gain the favor of the listeners. [63] The basic elements of hip hop—boasting raps, rival "posses" (groups), uptown "throw-downs", and political and social commentary—were all long present in African American music. MCing and rapping performers moved back and forth between the predominance of songs packed with a mix of boasting, 'slackness' and sexual innuendo and a more topical, political, socially conscious style. The role of the MC originally was as a Master of Ceremonies for a DJ dance event. The MC would introduce the DJ and try to pump up the audience. The MC spoke between the DJ's songs, urging everyone to get up and dance. MCs would also tell jokes and use their energetic language and enthusiasm to rev up the crowd. Eventually, this introducing role developed into longer sessions of spoken, rhythmic wordplay, and rhyming, which became rapping. By 1979 hip hop music had become a mainstream genre. Herc also developed upon break-beat deejaying, [64] where the breaks of funk songs—the part most suited to dance, usually percussion-based—were isolated and repeated for the purpose of all-night dance parties. This form of music playback, using hard funk and rock, formed the basis of hip hop music. Campbell's announcements and exhortations to dancers would lead to the syncopated, rhymed spoken accompaniment now known as rapping. He dubbed his dancers "break-boys" and "break-girls", or simply "b-boys" and "b-girls". According to Herc, "breaking" was also street slang for "getting excited" and "acting energetically". [65] 1520 Sedgwick Avenue , the Bronx , a venue used by Kool Herc that is often considered the birthplace of hip hop on August 11, 1973 [54] [66] DJs such as Grand Wizzard Theodore , Grandmaster Flash , and Jazzy Jay refined and developed the use of breakbeats, including cutting and scratching. [67] As turntable manipulation continued to evolve a new technique that came from it was needle dropping. Needle dropping was created by Grandmaster Flash, it is prolonged short drum breaks by playing two copies of a record simultaneously and moving the needle on one turntable back to the start of the break while the other played. [68] The approach used by Herc was soon widely copied, and by the late 1970s, DJs were releasing 12-inch records where they would rap to the beat. Popular tunes included Kurtis Blow 's " The Breaks " and the Sugarhill Gang 's " Rapper's Delight ". [69] Herc and other DJs would connect their equipment to power lines and perform at venues such as public basketball courts and at 1520 Sedgwick Avenue, Bronx, New York, now officially a historic building. [70] The equipment consisted of numerous speakers, turntables, and one or more microphones. [71] By using this technique, DJs could create a variety of music, but according to Rap Attack by David Toop "At its worst the technique could turn the night into one endless and inevitably boring song". [72] KC the Prince of Soul , a rapper-lyricist with Pete DJ Jones, is often credited with being the first rap lyricist to call himself an "MC". [73] Street gangs were prevalent in the poverty of the South Bronx, and much of the graffiti, rapping, and b-boying at these parties were all artistic variations on the competition and one-upmanship of street gangs. Sensing that gang members' often violent urges could be turned into creative ones, Afrika Bambaataa founded the Zulu Nation , a loose confederation of street-dance crews, graffiti artists, and rap musicians. By the late 1970s, the culture had gained media attention, with Billboard magazine printing an article titled "B Beats Bombarding Bronx", commenting on the local phenomenon and mentioning influential figures such as Kool Herc. [74] The New York City blackout of 1977 saw widespread looting, arson, and other citywide disorders especially in the Bronx [75] where a number of looters stole DJ equipment from electronics stores. As a result, the hip hop genre, barely known outside of the Bronx at the time, grew at an astounding rate from 1977 onward. [76] DJ Kool Herc's house parties gained popularity and later moved to outdoor venues to accommodate more people. Hosted in parks, these outdoor parties became a means of expression and an outlet for teenagers, where "instead of getting into trouble on the streets, teens now had a place to expend their pent-up energy." [77] Tony Tone, a member of the Cold Crush Brothers , stated that "hip hop saved a lot of lives". [77] For inner-city youth, participating in hip hop culture became a way of dealing with the hardships of life as minorities within America, and an outlet to deal with the risk of violence and the rise of gang culture. MC Kid Lucky mentions that "people used to break-dance against each other instead of fighting". [78] [79] Inspired by DJ Kool Herc, Afrika Bambaataa created a street organization called Universal Zulu Nation , centered on hip hop, as a means to draw teenagers out of gang life, drugs and violence. [77] The lyrical content of many early rap groups focused on social issues, most notably in the seminal track "The Message" by Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five , which discussed the realities of life in the housing projects. [80] "Young black Americans coming out of the civil rights movement have used hip hop culture in the 1980s and 1990s to show the limitations of the Hip Hop Movement." [81] Hip hop gave young African Americans a voice to let their issues be heard; "Like rock-and-roll, hip hop is vigorously opposed by conservatives because it romanticises violence, law-breaking, and gangs". [81] It also gave people a chance for financial gain by "reducing the rest of the world to consumers of its social concerns." [81] In late 1979, Debbie Harry of Blondie took Nile Rodgers of Chic to such an event, as the main backing track used was the break from Chic's " Good Times ". [69] The new style influenced Harry, and Blondie's later hit single from 1981 " Rapture " became the first single containing hip hop elements to hit number one on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 —the song itself is usually considered new wave and fuses heavy pop music elements, but there is an extended rap by Harry near the end. Boxer Muhammad Ali , as an influential African American celebrity, was widely covered in the media. Ali influenced several elements of hip hop music. Both in the boxing ring and in media interviews, Ali became known in the 1960s for being "rhyming trickster". Ali used a "funky delivery" for his comments, which included "boasts, comical trash talk , [and] the endless quotabl[e]" lines. [82] According to Rolling Stone , his " freestyle skills" (a reference to a type of vocal improvisation in which lyrics are recited with no particular subject or structure) and his "rhymes, flow, and braggadocio " would "one day become typical of old-school MCs" like Run-DMC and LL Cool J , [83] the latter citing Ali as an influence. [82] Hip hop music in its infancy has been described as an outlet and a "voice" for the disenfranchised youth of low-income and marginalized economic areas, [51] as the hip hop culture reflected the social, economic and political realities of their lives. [52] Technology Two hip hop DJs creating new music by mixing tracks from multiple record players. Pictured are DJ Hypnotize (left) and Baby Cee (right). Hip hop's early evolution occurred around the time that sampling technology and drum-machines became widely available to the general public at a cost that was affordable to the average consumer—not just professional studios. Drum-machines and samplers were combined in machines that came to be known as MPC 's or ' Music Production Centers ', early examples of which would include the Linn 9000 . The first sampler that was broadly adopted to create this new kind of music was the Mellotron used in combination with the TR-808 drum machine. Mellotrons and Linn's were succeeded by the Akai , in the late 1980s. [84] Turntablist techniques – such as rhythmic " scratching " (pushing a record back and forth while the needle is in the groove to create new sounds and sound effects , an approach attributed to Grand Wizzard Theodore [85] [86] ), beat mixing and/or beatmatching , and beat juggling – eventually developed along with the percussion breaks, creating a musical accompaniment or base that could be rapped over in a manner similar to signifying . Introduction of rapping Rapping , also referred to as MCing or emceeing, is a vocal style in which the artist speaks lyrically and rhythmically, in rhyme and verse, generally to an instrumental or synthesized beat . Beats, almost always in 4/4 time signature , can be created by sampling and/or sequencing portions of other songs by a producer . They also incorporate synthesizers, drum machines, and live bands. Rappers may write, memorize, or improvise their lyrics and perform their works a cappella or to a beat. Hip hop music predates the introduction of rapping into hip hop culture, and rap vocals are absent from many hip hop tracks, such as " Hip Hop, Be Bop (Don't Stop) " by Man Parrish ; " Chinese Arithmetic " by Eric B. & Rakim ; "Al-Naafiysh (The Soul)" and "We're Rocking the Planet" by Hashim ; and "Destination Earth" by Newcleus . However, the majority of the genre has been accompanied by rap vocals, such as the Sci-fi influenced electro hip hop group Warp 9 . [87] Female rappers appeared on the scene in the late 1970s and early 80s, including Bronx artist MC Sha-Rock , member of the Funky Four Plus One , credited with being the first female MC [88] and the Sequence , a hip hop trio signed to Sugar Hill Records , the first all female group to release a rap record, Funk You Up .[ citation needed ] The roots of rapping are found in African American music and bear similarities to traditional African music , particularly that of the griots [89] of West African culture. [90] The African American traditions of signifyin' , the dozens , and jazz poetry all influence hip hop music, as well as the call and response patterns of African and African American religious ceremonies. Early popular radio disc jockeys of the Black-appeal radio period broke into broadcast announcing by using these techniques under the jive talk of the post WWII swing era in the late 1940s and the 1950s. [91] DJ Nat D. was the M.C. at one of the most pitiless places for any aspiring musician trying to break into show business, Amateur Night at the Palace theatre on Beale Street in Memphis, Tennessee. There he was master of ceremonies from 1935 until 1947 along with his sideman, D.J. Rufus Thomas . It was there he perfected the dozens, signifyin' and the personality jock jive patter that would become his schtick when he became the first black radio announcer on the air south of the Mason–Dixon line. [92] Jive popularized black appeal radio, it was the language of the black youth, the double entendres and slightly obscene wordplay was a godsend to radio, re-invigorating ratings at flagging outlets that were losing audience share and flipping to the new format of R&B with black announcers . The 10% of African Americans who heard his broadcasts found that the music he promoted on radio in 1949 was also in the jukeboxes up north in the cities. They were also finding other D.J's like Chicago's Al Benson on WJJD , Austin's Doctor Hep Cat on KVET and Atlanta's Jockey Jack on WERD speaking the same rhyming, cadence laden rap style. [93] Once the white owned stations realized the new upstarts were grabbing their black market share and that Big Band and swing jazz was no longer 'hip', some white DJ's emulated the southern 'mushmouth' and jive talk, letting their audience think they too were African American, playing the blues and Be-Bop . [94] John R Richbourg had a southern drawl that listeners to Nashville's WLAC [95] nighttime R&B programming were never informed belonged not to a black D.J., as were other white DJ's at the station. Dr. Hep Cat's rhymes were published in a dictionary of jive talk, The Jives of Dr. Hepcat, in 1953. Jockey jack is the infamous Jack the Rapper of Family Affair fame, after his radio convention that was a must attend for every rap artist in the 1980s and 1990s [96] These jive talking rappers of the 1950s black appeal radio format were the source and inspiration of Soul singer James Brown , and musical 'comedy' acts such as Rudy Ray Moore , Pigmeat Markham and Blowfly that are often considered "godfathers" of hip hop music. [97] Within New York City, performances of spoken-word poetry and music by artists such as the Last Poets , Gil Scott-Heron [98] and Jalal Mansur Nuriddin had a significant impact on the post-civil rights era culture of the 1960s and '1970s, and thus the social environment in which hip hop music was created. Jamaican origins of outdoor sound systems Further information: Sound system (Jamaican) AM radio at many stations were limited by the 'broadcast Day' as special licenses were required to transmit at night. Those that had such licenses were heard far out to sea and in the Caribbean, where Jocko Henderson and Jockey Jack were American DJs who were listened to at night from broadcast transmitters located in Miami, Florida. Jocko came to have an outsized influence on Jamaican Emcees during the '50s as the R&B music played on the Miami stations was different from that played on JBC , which re-broadcast BBC and local music styles. In Jamaica, DJs would set up large roadside sound systems in towns and villages, playing music for informal gatherings, mostly folks who wandered down from country hills looking for excitement at the end of the week. There the DJs would allow 'Toasts' by an Emcee, which copied the style of the American DJs listened to on AM transistor radios. It was by this method that Jive talk, rapping and rhyming was transposed to the island and locally the style was transformed by 'Jamaican lyricism', or the local patois . Hip hop as music and culture formed during the 1970s in New York City from the multicultural exchange between African American youth from the United States and young immigrants and children of immigrants from countries in the Caribbean. [50] Some were influenced by the vocal style of the earliest African American radio MCs (including Jocko Henderson 's Rocket Ship Show of the 1950s, which rhymed and was influenced by scat singing ), which could be heard over the radio in Jamaica. The first records by Jamaican DJs, including Sir Lord Comic (The Great Wuga Wuga, 1967) came as part of the local dance hall culture, which featured 'specials,' unique mixes or 'versions' pressed on soft discs or acetate discs, and rappers (called DJs) such as King Stitt , Count Machuki, U-Roy , I-Roy , Big Youth and many others. Recordings of talk-over, which is a different style from the dancehall's DJ style, were also made by Jamaican artists such as Prince Buster and Lee "Scratch" Perry (Judge Dread) as early as 1967, somehow rooted in the 'talking blues' tradition. The first full-length Jamaican DJ record was a duet on a Rastafarian topic by Kingston ghetto dwellers U-Roy and Peter Tosh named Righteous Ruler (produced by Lee "Scratch" Perry in 1969). The first DJ hit record was Fire Corner by Coxsone's Downbeat sound system DJ, King Stitt that same year; 1970 saw a multitude of DJ hit records in the wake of U-Roy's early, massive hits, most famously Wake the Town and many others. As the tradition of remix (which also started in Jamaica where it was called 'version' and 'dub') developed, established young Jamaican DJ/rappers from that period, who had already been working for sound systems for years, were suddenly recorded and had many local hit records, widely contributing to the reggae craze triggered by Bob Marley's impact in the 1970s. The main Jamaican DJs of the early 1970s were King Stitt , Samuel the First, Count Machuki, Johnny Lover (who 'versioned' songs by Bob Marley and the Wailers as early as 1971), Dave Barker, Scotty, Lloyd Young, Charlie Ace and others, as well as soon-to-be reggae stars U-Roy , Dennis Alcapone , I-Roy , Prince Jazzbo , Prince Far I , Big Youth and Dillinger . Dillinger scored the first international rap hit record with Cocaine in my Brain in 1976 (based on the Do It Any Way You Wanna Do rhythm by the People's Choice as re-recorded by Sly and Robbie ), where he even used a New York accent, consciously aiming at the new NYC rap market. The Jamaican DJ dance music was deeply rooted in the sound system tradition that made music available to poor people in a very poor country where live music was only played in clubs and hotels patronized by the middle and upper classes. By 1973 Jamaican sound system enthusiast DJ Kool Herc moved to the Bronx, taking with him Jamaica's sound system culture, and teamed up with another Jamaican, Coke La Rock, at the mike. Although other influences, most notably musical sequencer Grandmaster Flowers of Brooklyn and Grandwizard Theodore of the Bronx contributed to the birth of hip hop in New York, and although it was downplayed in most US books about hip hop, the main root of this sound system culture was Jamaican. The roots of rap in Jamaica are explained in detail in Bruno Blum 's book, 'Le Rap'. [99] DJ Kool Herc and Coke La Rock provided an influence on the vocal style of rapping by delivering simple poetry verses over funk music breaks, after party-goers showed little interest in their previous attempts to integrate reggae-infused toasting into musical sets. [55] [100] DJs and MCs would often add call and response chants, often consisting of a basic chorus, to allow the performer to gather his thoughts (e.g. "one, two, three, y'all, to the beat"). Later, the MCs grew more varied in their vocal and rhythmic delivery, incorporating brief rhymes, often with a sexual or scatological theme, in an effort to differentiate themselves and to entertain the audience. These early raps incorporated the dozens, a product of African American culture. Kool Herc & the Herculoids were the first hip hop group to gain recognition in New York, [100] but the number of MC teams increased over time. Often these were collaborations between former gangs , such as Afrikaa Bambaataa 's Universal Zulu Nation —now an international organization. Melle Mel , a rapper with the Furious Five is often credited with being the first rap lyricist to call himself an "MC". [101] During the early 1970s B-boying arose during block parties, as b-boys and b-girls got in front of the audience to dance in a distinctive and frenetic style. The style was documented for release to a worldwide audience for the first time in documentaries and movies such as Style Wars , Wild Style , and Beat Street . The term "B-boy" was coined by DJ Kool Herc to describe the people who would wait for the break section of the song, showing off athleticism, spinning on the stage to 'break-dance' in the distinctive, frenetic style. [102] Although there were some early MCs that recorded solo projects of note, such as DJ Hollywood , Kurtis Blow , and Spoonie Gee , the frequency of solo artists did not increase until later with the rise of soloists with stage presence and drama, such as LL Cool J . Most early hip hop was dominated by groups where collaboration between the members was integral to the show. [103] An example would be the early hip hop group Funky Four Plus One , who performed in such a manner on Saturday Night Live in 1981. [104] 1979–1983: old-school hip hop Transition to recording The Sugarhill Gang used disco band Chic 's " Good Times " as the source of beats for their 1979 hip hop hit " Rapper's Delight ". Pictured is the Sugarhill Gang at a 2016 concert. The earliest hip hop music was performed live, at house parties and block party events, and it was not recorded. Prior to 1979, recorded hip hop music consisted mainly of PA system soundboard recordings of live party shows and early hip hop mixtapes by DJs. Puerto Rican DJ Disco Wiz is credited as the first hip hop DJ to create a "mixed plate," or mixed dub recording, when, in 1977, he combined sound bites, special effects and paused beats to technically produce a sound recording. [105] The first hip hop record is widely regarded to be the Sugarhill Gang 's " Rapper's Delight ", from 1979. It was the first hip hop record to gain widespread popularity in the mainstream and was where hip hop music got its name from (from the opening bar). [106] However, much controversy surrounds this assertion as some regard the March 1979 single " King Tim III (Personality Jock) " by the Fatback Band , as a rap record. [107] There are various other claimants for the title of first hip hop record. By the early 1980s, all the major elements and techniques of the hip hop genre were in place, and by 1982, the electronic (electro) sound had become the trend on the street and in dance clubs. New York City radio station WKTU featured Warp 9 's " Nunk ", in a commercial to promote the station's signature sound of emerging hip hop [108] Though not yet mainstream, hip hop had begun to permeate the music scene outside of New York City; it could be found in cities as diverse as Los Angeles, Atlanta , Chicago, Washington, D.C., Baltimore , Dallas , Kansas City , San Antonio , Miami, Seattle , St. Louis , New Orleans , Houston , and Toronto . Indeed, " Funk You Up " (1979), the first hip hop record released by a female group, and the second single released by Sugar Hill Records , was performed by the Sequence , a group from Columbia, South Carolina which featured Angie Stone . [109] Despite the genre's growing popularity, Philadelphia was, for many years, the only city whose contributions could be compared to New York City's. Hip hop music became popular in Philadelphia in the late 1970s. The first released record was titled "Rhythm Talk", by Jocko Henderson . The New York Times had dubbed Philadelphia the "Graffiti Capital of the World" in 1971. Philadelphia native DJ Lady B recorded "To the Beat Y'All" in 1979, and became the first female solo hip hop artist to record music. [110] Schoolly D , starting in 1984 and also from Philadelphia, began creating a style that would later be known as gangsta rap . Influence of disco Hip hop music was influenced by disco music, as disco also emphasized the key role of the DJ in creating tracks and mixes for dancers, and old school hip hop often used disco tracks as beats. At the same time however, hip hop music was also a backlash against certain subgenres of late 1970s disco. While the early disco was African American and Italian-American-created underground music developed by DJs and producers for the dance club subculture, by the late 1970s, disco airwaves were dominated by mainstream, expensively recorded music industry -produced disco songs. According to Kurtis Blow , the early days of hip hop were characterized by divisions between fans and detractors of disco music. Hip hop had largely emerged as "a direct response to the watered down, Europeanised, disco music that permeated the airwaves". [111] [112] The earliest hip hop was mainly based on hard funk loops sourced from vintage funk records. By 1979, disco instrumental loops/tracks had become the basis of much hip hop music. This genre was called "disco rap". Ironically, the rise of hip hop music also played a role in the eventual decline in disco's popularity. The disco sound had a strong influence on early hip hop music. Most of the early rap/hip-hop songs were created by isolating existing disco bass-guitar bass lines and dubbing over them with MC rhymes. the Sugarhill Gang used Chic 's " Good Times " as the foundation for their 1979 hit " Rapper's Delight ", generally considered to be the song that first popularized rap music in the United States and around the world. In 1982, Afrika Bambaataa released the single " Planet Rock ", which incorporated electronica elements from Kraftwerk 's " Trans-Europe Express " and "Numbers" as well as YMO 's "Riot in Lagos". The Planet Rock sound also spawned a hip-hop electronic dance trend, electro music , which included songs such as Planet Patrol 's "Play at Your Own Risk" (1982), C Bank's "One More Shot" (1982), Cerrone 's "Club Underworld" (1984), Shannon 's " Let the Music Play " (1983), Freeez 's "I.O.U." (1983), Midnight Star 's "Freak-a-Zoid" (1983), Chaka Khan 's " I Feel For You " (1984). DJ Pete Jones, Eddie Cheeba, DJ Hollywood , and Love Bug Starski were disco-influenced hip hop DJs. Their styles differed from other hip hop musicians who focused on rapid-fire rhymes and more complex rhythmic schemes. Afrika Bambaataa , Paul Winley, Grandmaster Flash , and Bobby Robinson were all members of third s latter group. In Washington, D.C. go-go emerged as a reaction against disco and eventually incorporated characteristics of hip hop during the early 1980s. The DJ-based genre of electronic music behaved similarly, eventually evolving into underground styles known as house music in Chicago and techno in Detroit. Diversification of styles Further information: List of hip hop genres DJ Jazzy Jeff , who is also a record producer, manipulating a record turntable in England in 2005 The 1980s marked the diversification of hip hop as the genre developed more complex styles. [113] New York City became a veritable laboratory for the creation of new hip hop sounds. Early examples of the diversification process can be heard in tracks such as Grandmaster Flash's " The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel " (1981), a single consisting entirely of sampled tracks [114] as well as Afrika Bambaataa 's " Planet Rock " (1982), and Warp 9 's " Nunk ", (1982) [115] which signified the fusion of hip hop music with electro . In addition, Rammellzee & K-Rob 's "Beat Bop" (1983) was a 'slow jam' which had a dub influence with its use of reverb and echo as texture and playful sound effects. " Light Years Away ", by Warp 9 (1983), (produced and written by Lotti Golden and Richard Scher) described as a "cornerstone of early 80s beatbox afrofuturism," by the UK paper, The Guardian , [87] introduced social commentary from a sci-fi perspective. In the 1970s, hip hop music typically used samples from funk and later, from disco. The mid-1980s marked a paradigm shift in the development of hip hop, with the introduction of samples from rock music, as demonstrated in the albums King of Rock and Licensed to Ill . Hip hop prior to this shift is characterized as old-school hip hop . The Roland TR-808 Rhythm Composer, a staple sound of hip hop In 1980, the Roland Corporation launched the TR-808 Rhythm Composer. It was one of the earliest programmable drum machines, with which users could create their own rhythms rather than having to use preset patterns. Though it was a commercial failure, over the course of the decade the 808 attracted a cult following among underground musicians for its affordability on the used market, [116] ease of use, [117] and idiosyncratic sounds, particularly its deep, "booming" bass drum . [118] It became a cornerstone of the emerging electronic, dance, and hip hop genres, popularized by early hits such as Afrika Bambaataa and the Soulsonic Force 's " Planet Rock ". [119] The 808 was eventually used on more hit records than any other drum machine; [120] its popularity with hip hop in particular has made it one of the most influential inventions in popular music, comparable to the Fender Stratocaster 's influence on rock. [121] [122] DJ Marley Marl Over time sampling technology became more advanced. However, earlier producers such as Marley Marl used drum machines to construct their beats from small excerpts of other beats in synchronisation , in his case, triggering three Korg sampling-delay units through a Roland 808. Later, samplers such as the E-mu SP-1200 allowed not only more memory but more flexibility for creative production. This allowed the filtration and layering different hits, and with a possibility of re-sequencing them into a single piece. With the emergence of a new generation of samplers such as the AKAI S900 in the late 1980s, producers did not have to create complex, time-consuming tape loops. Public Enemy 's first album was created with the help of large tape loops. The process of looping a break into a breakbeat now became more commonly done with a sampler, now doing the job which so far had been done manually by the DJs using turntables. In 1989, DJ Mark James, under the moniker "45 King", released "The 900 Number", a breakbeat track created by synchronizing samplers and vinyl records. [103] Grandmaster Flash performing in 1999 The lyrical content and other instrumental accompaniment of hip hop developed as well. The early lyrical styles in the 1970, which tended to be boasts and clichéd chants, were replaced with metaphorical lyrics exploring a wider range of subjects. As well, the lyrics were performed over more complex, multi-layered instrumental accompaniment. Artists such as Melle Mel , Rakim , Chuck D , KRS-One and Warp 9 revolutionized hip hop by transforming it into a more mature art form, with sophisticated arrangements, often featuring "gorgeous textures and multiple layers" [123] The influential single " The Message " (1982) by Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five is widely considered to be the pioneering force for conscious rap . Independent record labels like Tommy Boy , Prism Records and Profile Records became successful in the early 1980s, releasing records at a furious pace in response to the demand generated by local radio stations and club DJs. Early 1980s electro music and rap were catalysts that sparked the hip hop movement, led by artists such as Cybotron , Hashim , Afrika Bambaataa , Planet Patrol , Newcleus and Warp 9 . In the New York City recording scene, artists collaborated with producer/writers such as Arthur Baker , John Robie , Lotti Golden and Richard Scher, exchanging ideas that contributed to the development of hip hop. [124] Some rappers eventually became mainstream pop performers. Kurtis Blow 's appearance in a Sprite soda pop commercial [125] marked the first hip hop musician to do a commercial for a major product. The 1981 songs " Rapture " by Blondie and " Christmas Wrapping " by the new wave band the Waitresses were among the first pop songs to use rap. In 1982, Afrika Bambaataa introduced hip hop to an international audience with " Planet Rock ." Prior to the 1980s, hip hop music was largely confined within the context of the United States. However, during the 1980s, it began its spread and became a part of the music scene in dozens of countries. Greg Wilson was the first DJ to introduce electro hip hop to UK club audiences in the early 1980s, opting for the dub or instrumental versions of Nunk by Warp 9 , Extra T's "ET Boogie", Hip Hop, Be Bop (Don't Stop) by Man Parrish , Planet Rock and Dirty Talk . [126] In the early part of the decade, B-boying became the first aspect of hip hop culture to reach Japan, Australia and South Africa. In South Africa, the breakdance crew Black Noise established the practice before beginning to rap later in the decade. Musician and presenter Sidney became France's first black TV presenter with his show H.I.P. H.O.P. [127] which screened on TF1 during 1984, a first for the genre worldwide. Sidney is considered the father of French hip hop. Radio Nova helped launch other French hip hop stars including Dee Nasty , whose 1984 album Paname City Rappin' along with compilations Rapattitude 1 and 2 contributed to a general awareness of hip hop in France. Hip hop has always kept a very close relationship with the Hispanic community in New York. DJ Disco Wiz and the Rock Steady Crew were among early innovators from Puerto Rico , combining English and Spanish in their lyrics. the Mean Machine recorded their first song under the label "Disco Dreams" in 1981, while Kid Frost from Los Angeles began his career in 1982. Cypress Hill was formed in 1988 in the suburb of South Gate outside Los Angeles when Senen Reyes (born in Havana) and his younger brother Ulpiano Sergio ( Mellow Man Ace ) moved from Cuba to South Gate with his family in 1971. They teamed up with DVX from Queens (New York), Lawrence Muggerud ( DJ Muggs ) and Louis Freese ( B-Real ), a Mexican/Cuban-American native of Los Angeles. After the departure of "Ace" to begin his solo career, the group adopted the name of Cypress Hill named after a street running through a neighborhood nearby in South Los Angeles. Japanese hip hop is said to have begun when Hiroshi Fujiwara returned to Japan and started playing hip hop records in the early 1980s. [128] Japanese hip hop generally tends to be most directly influenced by old school hip hop, taking the era's catchy beats, dance culture, and overall fun and carefree nature and incorporating it into their music. Hip hop became one of the most commercially viable mainstream music genres in Japan, and the line between it and pop music is frequently blurred. 1983–1986: new-school hip hop Run-DMC , from left to right: Joseph "Run" Simmons , Jason "Jam Master Jay" Mizell , and Darryl "D.M.C." McDaniels The new school of hip hop was the second wave of hip hop music, originating in 1983–84 with the early records of Run-D.M.C. and LL Cool J . As with the hip hop preceding it (which subsequently became known as old-school hip hop ), the new school came predominantly from New York City. The new school was initially characterized in form by drum machine -led minimalism, with influences from rock music, a hip hop "metal music for the 80s–a hard-edge ugly/beauty trance as desperate and stimulating as New York itself." [129] It was notable for taunts and boasts about rapping, and socio-political commentary, both delivered in an aggressive, self-assertive style. In image as in song its artists projected a tough, cool, street b-boy attitude. These elements contrasted sharply with much of the previous funk- and disco-influenced hip hop groups, whose music was often characterized by novelty hits, live bands, synthesizers, and "party rhymes" (not all artists prior to 1983–84 had these styles). New-school artists made shorter songs that could more easily gain radio play, and they produced more cohesive LP albums than their old-school counterparts. By 1986, their releases began to establish the hip-hop album as a fixture of mainstream music. Hip hop music became commercially successful, as exemplified by the Beastie Boys ' 1986 album Licensed to Ill , which was the first rap album to hit No. 1 on the Billboard charts. [130] 1986–1997: Golden age hip hop Main article: Golden age hip hop KRS-One and his Boogie Down Productions were key performers in golden age hip hop. Hip hop's "golden age" (or "golden era") is a name given to a period in mainstream hip hop, produced between the mid-1980s and the mid-1990s, [131] [132] [133] which is characterized by its diversity, quality, innovation and influence. [134] [135] There were strong themes of Afrocentrism and political militancy in golden age hip hop lyrics. The music was experimental and the sampling drew on eclectic sources. [136] There was often a strong jazz influence in the music. The artists and groups most often associated with this phase are Public Enemy , Boogie Down Productions , Eric B. & Rakim , De La Soul , A Tribe Called Quest , Gang Starr , Big Daddy Kane and the Jungle Brothers . [137] The Digable Planets made unique contributions as well, earning a Grammy in 1993. The golden age is noted for its innovation – a time "when it seemed that every new single reinvented the genre" [138] according to Rolling Stone . Referring to "hip-hop in its golden age", [139] Spin 's editor-in-chief Sia Michel says, "there were so many important, groundbreaking albums coming out right about that time", [139] and MTV 's Sway Calloway adds: "The thing that made that era so great is that nothing was contrived. Everything was still being discovered and everything was still innovative and new". [140] Writer William Jelani Cobb says "what made the era they inaugurated worthy of the term golden was the sheer number of stylistic innovations that came into existence... in these golden years, a critical mass of mic prodigies were literally creating themselves and their art form at the same time". [141] The golden age spans "from approximately 1986 to 1997", according to Carl Stoffers of New York Daily News . [131] In their article "In Search of the Golden Age Hip-Hop Sound", music theorists Ben Duinker and Denis Martin of Empirical Musicology Review use "the 11 years between and including 1986 and 1996 as chronological boundaries" to define the golden age, beginning with the releases of Run-DMC's Raising Hell and the Beastie Boys' Licensed to Ill , and ending with the deaths of Tupac Shakur and the Notorious B.I.G. [133] The Boombox writer Todd "Stereo" Williams also cites the May 1986 release of Raising Hell (which sold more than three million copies) as the start of the period and notes that over the next year other important albums were released to success, including Licensed to Ill, Boogie Down Productions' Criminal Minded (1987), Public Enemy's Yo! Bum Rush the Show (1987), and Eric B. & Rakim's Paid in Full (1987). Williams views this development as the beginning of hip hop's own " album era " from the late 1980s to the late 1990s, during which hip hop albums earned an unprecedented critical recognition and "would be the measuring stick by which most of the genre's greats would be judged". [142] Gangsta rap and West Coast hip hop Main articles: Gangsta rap and West Coast hip hop Many black rappers—including Ice-T and Sister Souljah—contend that they are being unfairly singled out because their music reflects deep changes in society not being addressed anywhere else in the public forum. The white politicians, the artists complain, neither understand the music nor desire to hear what's going on in the devastated communities that gave birth to the art form. — Chuck Philips , Los Angeles Times , 1992 [143] Gangsta rap is a subgenre of hip hop that reflects the violent lifestyles of inner-city American black youths. [144] Gangsta is a non-rhotic pronunciation of the word gangster . The genre was pioneered in the mid-1980s by rappers such as Schoolly D and Ice-T , and was popularized in the later part of the 1980s by groups like N.W.A . In 1985 Schoolly D released " P.S.K. What Does It Mean? ", which is often regarded as the first gangsta rap song, which was followed by Ice-T's " 6 in the Mornin' " in 1986. After the national attention and controversy that Ice-T and N.W.A created in the late 1980s and early 1990s, as well as the mainstreaming of G-funk in the mid-1990s, gangsta rap became the most commercially-lucrative subgenre of hip hop. Some gangsta rappers were known for mixing the political and social commentary of political rap with the criminal elements and crime stories found in gangsta rap. [145] N.W.A is the group most frequently associated with the founding of gangsta rap. Their lyrics were more violent, openly confrontational, and shocking than those of established rap acts, featuring incessant profanity and, controversially, use of the word " nigga ". These lyrics were placed over rough, rock guitar-driven beats, contributing to the music's hard-edged feel. The first blockbuster gangsta rap album was N.W.A's Straight Outta Compton , released in 1988. Straight Outta Compton would establish West Coast hip hop as a vital genre, and establish Los Angeles as a legitimate rival to hip hop's long-time capital, New York City. Straight Outta Compton sparked the first major controversy regarding hip hop lyrics when their song " Fuck tha Police " earned a letter from FBI Assistant Director, Milt Ahlerich, strongly expressing law enforcement 's resentment of the song. [146] [147] Controversy surrounded Ice-T's album Body Count , in particular over its song " Cop Killer ". The song was intended to speak from the viewpoint of a criminal getting revenge on racist, brutal cops. Ice-T's rock song infuriated government officials, the National Rifle Association of America and various police advocacy groups. [148] [149] Consequently, Time Warner Music refused to release Ice-T's upcoming album Home Invasion because of the controversy surrounding "Cop Killer". [150] Ice-T suggested that the furor over the song was an overreaction, telling journalist Chuck Philips "...they've done movies about nurse killers and teacher killers and student killers. [Actor] Arnold Schwarzenegger blew away dozens of cops as the Terminator . But I don't hear anybody complaining about that." In the same interview, Ice-T suggested to Philips that the misunderstanding of Cop Killer and the attempts to censor it had racial overtones: "The Supreme Court says it's OK for a white man to burn a cross in public. But nobody wants a black man to write a record about a cop killer." [148] The subject matter inherent in gangsta rap more generally has caused controversy. The White House administrations of both George H. W. Bush and Bill Clinton criticized the genre. [143] "The reason why rap is under attack is because it exposes all the contradictions of American culture ...What started out as an underground art form has become a vehicle to expose a lot of critical issues that are not usually discussed in American politics. The problem here is that the White House and wanna-bes like Bill Clinton represent a political system that never intends to deal with inner city urban chaos," Sister Souljah told The Times. [143] Due to the influence of Ice-T and N.W.A, gangsta rap is often viewed as a primarily West Coast phenomenon, despite the contributions of East Coast acts like Schoolly D and Boogie Down Productions in shaping the genre. Mainstream breakthrough Flavor Flav of Public Enemy performing in 1991 In 1990, Public Enemy 's Fear of a Black Planet was a significant success with music critics and consumers. [151] The album played a key role in hip hop's mainstream emergence in 1990, dubbed by Billboard editor Paul Grein as "the year that rap exploded". [151] In a 1990 article on its commercial breakthrough, Janice C. Thompson of Time wrote that hip hop "has grown into the most exciting development in American pop music in more than a decade." [152] Thompson noted the impact of Public Enemy's 1989 single " Fight the Power ", rapper Tone Lōc 's single Wild Thing being the best-selling single of 1989, and that at the time of her article, nearly a third of the songs on the Billboard Hot 100 were hip hop songs. [152] In a similar 1990 article, Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times put hip hop music's commercial emergence into perspective: It was 10 years ago that the Sugarhill Gang 's " Rapper's Delight " became the first rap single to enter the national Top 20. Who ever figured then that the music would even be around in 1990, much less produce attractions that would command as much pop attention as Public Enemy and N.W.A ? "Rapper's Delight" was a novelty record that was considered by much of the pop community simply as a lightweight offshoot of disco—and that image stuck for years. Occasional records—including Grandmaster Flash 's " The Message " in 1982 and Run-DMC 's " It's Like That " in 1984—won critical approval, but rap, mostly, was dismissed as a passing fancy—too repetitious, too one dimensional. Yet rap didn't go away, and an explosion of energy and imagination in the late 1980s leaves rap today as arguably the most vital new street-oriented sound in pop since the birth of rock in the 1950s. [153] Rap is the rock 'n' roll of the day. Rock 'n' roll was about attitude, rebellion, a big beat, sex and, sometimes, social comment. If that's what you're looking for now, you're going to find it here. — Bill Adler , Time , 1990 [152] MC Hammer hit mainstream success with the multi platinum album Please Hammer, Don't Hurt 'Em . The record reached No. 1 and the first single, " U Can't Touch This " charted on the top ten of the Billboard Hot 100 . MC Hammer became one of the most successful rappers of the early nineties and one of the first household names in the genre. The album raised rap music to a new level of popularity. It was the first hip-hop album certified diamond by the RIAA for sales of over ten million. [154] It remains one of the genre's all-time best-selling albums. [155] To date, the album has sold as many as 18 million units. [156] [157] [158] [159] Released in 1990, " Ice Ice Baby " by Vanilla Ice was the first hip hop single to top the Billboard charts in the U.S. It also reached number one in the UK, Australia among others and has been credited for helping diversify hip hop by introducing it to a mainstream audience. [160] In 1992, Dr. Dre released The Chronic . As well as helping to establish West Coast gangsta rap as more commercially viable than East Coast hip hop, [161] this album founded a style called G Funk , which soon came to dominate West Coast hip hop. The style was further developed and popularized by Snoop Dogg 's 1993 album Doggystyle . However, hip hop was still met with resistance from black radio, including urban contemporary radio stations. Russell Simmons said in 1990, "Black radio [stations] hated rap from the start and there's still a lot of resistance to it". [153] Despite the lack of support from some black radio stations, hip hop became a best-selling music genre in the mid-1990s and the top selling music genre by 1999 with 81 million CDs sold. [162] [163] [164] By the late 1990s hip hop was artistically dominated by the Wu-Tang Clan , Diddy and the Fugees . [161] The Beastie Boys continued their success throughout the decade crossing color lines and gaining respect from many different artists. Record labels based out of Atlanta , St. Louis , and New Orleans also gained fame for their local scenes. The midwest rap scene was known for fast vocal styles from artists such as Bone Thugs-n-Harmony , Tech N9ne , and Twista . By the end of the decade, hip hop was an integral part of popular music, and many American pop songs had hip hop components. Hip hop has been described as a "mainstream subculture". The main reasons why hip hop culture secured its subcultural authority despite becoming a part of the mass media and mainstream industries can be summarized as follows. First, hip hop artists promoted symbolic and conspicuous consumption in their music from a very early stage. Second, the continuing display of resistance in hip-hop has continuously attracted new generations of rebellious fans. Third, owing to the subcultural ideal of rising from the underground, the hip hop scene has remained committed to its urban roots. Fourth, the concept of battle rap has prevented hip-hop music from excessive cultural dilution. Finally, the solidarity within the African American community has shielded the subculture from erosion through mainstream commercialization. [165] East vs. West rivalry Main article: East Coast–West Coast hip hop rivalry These graffiti arts are a tribute to East and West Coast rappers the Notorious B.I.G. and Tupac Shakur , both of whom were killed in (separate) drive-by shootings. The East Coast–West Coast hip hop rivalry was a feud from 1991 to 1997 between artists and fans of the East Coast hip hop and West Coast hip hop scenes in the United States, especially from 1994 to 1997. Focal points of the feud were East Coast-based rapper the Notorious B.I.G. (and his New York-based label, Bad Boy Records ) and West Coast-based rapper Tupac Shakur (and his Los Angeles-based label, Death Row Records ). This rivalry started before the rappers themselves hit the scene. Because New York is the birthplace of hip-hop, artists from the West Coast felt as if they were not receiving the same media coverage and public attention as the East Coast. [166] As time went on both rappers began to grow in fame and as they both became more known the tensions continued to arise. Eventually both artists were fatally shot following drive-by shootings by unknown assailants in 1997 and 1996, respectively. East Coast hip hop Main article: East Coast hip hop Wu-Tang Clan at the Virgin Festival in 2007 In the early 1990s East Coast hip hop was dominated by the Native Tongues posse, which was loosely composed of De La Soul with producer Prince Paul , A Tribe Called Quest , the Jungle Brothers , as well as their loose affiliates 3rd Bass , Main Source , and the less successful Black Sheep and KMD . Although originally a "daisy age" conception stressing the positive aspects of life, darker material (such as De La Soul's thought-provoking "Millie Pulled a Pistol on Santa") soon crept in. Artists such as Masta Ace (particularly for SlaughtaHouse ), Brand Nubian , Public Enemy , Organized Konfusion , and Tragedy Khadafi had a more overtly-militant pose, both in sound and manner. In 1993, the Wu-Tang Clan 's Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) revitalized the New York hip hop scene by pioneering an East Coast hardcore rap equivalent in intensity to what was being produced on the West Coast. [167] According to Allmusic, the production on two Mobb Deep albums, The Infamous (1995) and Hell on Earth (1996), are "indebted" to RZA 's early production with the Wu-Tang Clan. [168] [169] The success of albums such as Nas 's Illmatic and Notorious B.I.G. 's Ready to Die in 1994 cemented the status of the East Coast during a time of West Coast dominance. In a March 2002 issue of The Source Magazine , Nas referred to 1994 as "a renaissance of New York [City] Hip-Hop." [170] The productions of RZA, particularly for the Wu-Tang Clan, became influential with artists such as Mobb Deep due to the combination of somewhat detached instrumental loops, highly compressed and processed drums, and gangsta lyrical content. Wu-Tang solo albums such as Raekwon the Chef 's Only Built 4 Cuban Linx , Ghostface Killah 's Ironman , and GZA 's Liquid Swords are now viewed as classics along with Wu-Tang "core" material. The clan's base extended into further groups called "Wu-affiliates". Producers such as DJ Premier (primarily for Gang Starr but also for other affiliated artists, such as Jeru the Damaja ), Pete Rock (with CL Smooth , and supplying beats for many others), Buckwild , Large Professor , Diamond D , and Q-Tip supplied beats for numerous MCs at the time, regardless of location. Albums such as Nas's Illmatic, O.C. 's Word...Life (1994), and Jay-Z 's Reasonable Doubt (1996) are made up of beats from this pool of producers. The rivalry between the East Coast and the West Coast rappers eventually turned personal. [171] Later in the decade the business acumen of the Bad Boy Records tested itself against Jay-Z and his Roc-A-Fella Records and, on the West Coast, Death Row Records . The mid to late 1990s saw a generation of rappers such as the members of D.I.T.C. such as the late Big L and Big Pun . On the East Coast, although the "big business" end of the market dominated matters commercially the late 1990s to early 2000s saw a number of relatively successful East Coast indie labels such as Rawkus Records (with whom Mos Def and Talib Kweli garnered success) and later Def Jux . The history of the two labels is intertwined, the latter having been started by EL-P of Company Flow in reaction to the former, and offered an outlet for more underground artists such as Mike Ladd , Aesop Rock , Mr Lif , RJD2 , Cage and Cannibal Ox . Other acts such as the Hispanic Arsonists and slam poet turned MC Saul Williams met with differing degrees of success. West Coast hip hop Dr. Dre performing with Snoop Dogg , 2012 After N.W.A. broke up, former member Dr. Dre released The Chronic in 1992, which peaked at No. 1 on the R&B/hip hop chart, [172] No. 3 on the pop chart, and spawned a No. 2 pop single with " Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang ". The Chronic took West Coast rap in a new direction, [173] influenced strongly by P funk artists, melding smooth and easy funk beats with slowly-drawled lyrics. This came to be known as G-funk and dominated mainstream hip hop in the early-mid 1990s through a roster of artists on Suge Knight 's Death Row Records , including Tupac Shakur , whose double disc album All Eyez on Me was a big hit with hit songs " Ambitionz az a Ridah " and " 2 of Amerikaz Most Wanted ";[ citation needed ] and Snoop Doggy Dogg , whose Doggystyle included the top ten hits " What's My Name? " and " Gin and Juice ". [174] As the Los Angeles-based Death Row built an empire around Dre, Snoop, and Tupac, it also entered into a rivalry with New York City's Bad Boy Records , led by Puff Daddy and the Notorious B.I.G. Detached from this scene were other artists such as Freestyle Fellowship and the Pharcyde , as well as more underground artists such as the Solesides collective ( DJ Shadow and Blackalicious amongst others), Jurassic 5 , Ugly Duckling , People Under the Stairs , Tha Alkaholiks , and earlier Souls of Mischief , who represented a return to hip hop's roots of sampling and well-planned rhyme schemes. Further diversification Rapper Scarface from the southern U.S. group Geto Boys In the 1990s, hip hop began to diversify with other regional styles emerging on the national scene. Southern rap became popular in the early 1990s. [175] The first Southern rappers to gain national attention were the Geto Boys out of Houston, Texas. [176] Southern rap's roots can be traced to the success of Geto Boy's Grip It! On That Other Level in 1989, the Rick Rubin produced The Geto Boys in 1990, and We Can't Be Stopped in 1991. [177] The Houston area also produced other artists that pioneered the early southern rap sound such as UGK and the solo career of Scarface . Atlanta hip hop artists were key in further expanding rap music and bringing southern hip hop into the mainstream. Releases such as Arrested Development 's 3 Years, 5 Months and 2 Days in the Life Of... in 1992, Goodie Mob 's Soul Food in 1995 and OutKast 's ATLiens in 1996 were all critically acclaimed. Other distinctive regional sounds from St. Louis , Chicago, Washington D.C., Detroit and others began to gain popularity. What once was rap now is hip hop, an endlessly various mass phenomenon that continues to polarize older rock and rollers , although it's finally convinced some gatekeeping generalists that it may be of enduring artistic value—a discovery to which they were beaten by millions of young consumers black and white. — Christgau's Consumer Guide: Albums of the '90s (2000) [178] During the golden age, elements of hip hop continued to be assimilated into other genres of popular music. The first waves of rap rock , rapcore , and rap metal — respective fusions of hip hop and rock, hardcore punk , and heavy metal [179] — became popular among mainstream audiences at this time; Run-DMC, the Beastie Boys, and Rage Against the Machine were among the most well-known bands in these fields. In Hawaii, bands such as Sudden Rush combined hip hop elements with the local language and political issues to form a style called na mele paleoleo . [180]
Toggle the table of contents Classical music From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Broad tradition of Western art music This article is about Western art music from the Middle Ages to the present. For other uses, see Classical music (disambiguation) . A youth orchestra performing Classical music generally refers to the art music of the Western world , considered to be distinct from Western folk music or popular music traditions. It is sometimes distinguished as Western classical music, as the term "classical music" can also be applied to non-Western art musics . Classical music is often characterized by formality and complexity in its musical form and harmonic organization , [1] particularly with the use of polyphony . [2] Since at least the ninth century it has been primarily a written tradition, [2] spawning a sophisticated notational system, as well as accompanying literature in analytical , critical , historiographical , musicological and philosophical practices. A foundational component of Western culture , classical music is frequently seen from the perspective of individual or groups of composers , whose compositions, personalities and beliefs have fundamentally shaped its history. Rooted in the patronage of churches and royal courts in Western Europe , [1] surviving early medieval music is chiefly religious , monophonic and vocal, with the music of ancient Greece and Rome influencing its thought and theory. The earliest extant music manuscripts date from the Carolingian Empire (800–888), [3] around the time which Western plainchant gradually unified into what is termed Gregorian chant . [4] Musical centers existed at the Abbey of Saint Gall , the Abbey of Saint Martial and Saint Emmeram's Abbey , while the 11th century saw the development of staff notation and increasing output from medieval music theorists . By the mid-12th century France became the major European musical center: [3] The religious Notre-Dame school first fully explored organized rhythms and polyphony, while secular music flourished with the troubadour and trouvère traditions led by poet-musician nobles. [5] This culminated in the court sponsored French ars nova and Italian Trecento , which evolved into ars subtilior , a stylistic movement of extreme rhythmic diversity. [5] Beginning in the early 15th century, Renaissance composers of the influential Franco-Flemish School built off the harmonic principles in the English contenance angloise , bringing choral music to new standards, particularly the mass and motet . [6] Northern Italy soon emerged as the central musical region, where the Roman School engaged in highly sophisticated methods of polyphony in genres such as the madrigal , [6] which inspired the brief English Madrigal School . The Baroque period (1580–1750) saw the relative standardization of common-practice tonality , [7] as well as the increasing importance of musical instruments , which grew into ensembles of considerable size. Italy remained dominant, being the birthplace of opera , the soloist centered concerto genre, the organized sonata form as well as the large scale vocal-centered genres of oratorio and cantata . The fugue technique championed by Johann Sebastian Bach exemplified the Baroque tendency for complexity, and as a reaction the simpler and song-like galant music and empfindsamkeit styles were developed. In the shorter but pivotal Classical period (1730–1820) composers such as Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart , Joseph Haydn , and Ludwig van Beethoven created widely admired representatives of absolute music , [8] [9] including symphonies , string quartets and concertos. The subsequent Romantic music (1800–1910) focused instead on programmatic music , for which the art song , symphonic poem and various piano genres were important vessels. During this time virtuosity was celebrated, immensity was encouraged, while philosophy and nationalism were embedded—all aspects that converged in the operas of Richard Wagner . By the 20th century, stylistic unification gradually dissipated while the prominence of popular music greatly increased. Many composers actively avoided past techniques and genres in the lens of modernism , with some abandoning tonality in place of serialism , while others found new inspiration in folk melodies or impressionist sentiments. After World War II, for the first time audience members valued older music over contemporary works, a preference which has been catered to by the emergence and widespread availability of commercial recordings. [10] Trends of the mid-20th century to the present day include New Simplicity , New Complexity , Minimalism , Spectral music , and more recently Postmodern music and Postminimalism . Increasingly global, practitioners from the Americas, Africa and Asia have obtained crucial roles, [3] while symphony orchestras and opera houses now appear across the world. Terminology and definition[ edit ] Ideological origins[ edit ] (from left to right) Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven from the 1904 Beethoven–Haydn–Mozart Memorial . The three are part of the First Viennese School and among the first composers to be referred to as "Classical". Both the English term "classical" and the German equivalent Klassik developed from the French classique , itself derived from the Latin word classicus , which originally referred to the highest class of Ancient Roman citizens . [11] [n 1] In Roman usage, the term later became a means to distinguish revered literary figures; [11] the Roman author Aulus Gellius commended writers such as Demosthenes and Virgil as classicus. [13] By the Renaissance , the adjective had acquired a more general meaning: an entry in Randle Cotgrave 's 1611 A Dictionarie of the French and English Tongues is among the earliest extant definitions, translating classique as "classical, formall  [ sic ], orderlie, in due or fit ranke; also, approved, authenticall, chiefe, principall". [11] [14] The musicologist Daniel Heartz summarizes this into two definitions: 1) a "formal discipline" and 2) a "model of excellence". [11] Like Gellius, later Renaissance scholars who wrote in Latin used classicus in reference to writers of classical antiquity ; [12] [n 2] however, this meaning only gradually developed, and was for a while subordinate to the broader classical ideals of formality and excellence. [15] Literature and visual arts—for which substantial Ancient Greek and Roman examples existed—did eventually adopt the term "classical" as relating to classical antiquity, but virtually no music of that time was available to Renaissance musicians, limiting the connection between classical music and the Greco-Roman world . [15] [n 3] It was in 18th-century England that the term 'classical' "first came to stand for a particular canon of works in performance." [15] London had developed a prominent public concert music scene, unprecedented and unmatched by other European cities. [11] The royal court had gradually lost its monopoly on music, in large part from instability that the Commonwealth of England 's dissolution and the Glorious Revolution enacted on court musicians. [11] [n 4] In 1672, the former court musician John Banister began giving popular public concerts at a London tavern; [n 5] his popularity rapidly inaugurated the prominence of public concerts in the London. [19] The conception of "classical"—or more often "ancient music"—emerged, which was still built on the principles of formality and excellence, and according to Heartz "civic ritual, religion and moral activism figured significantly in this novel construction of musical taste". [15] The performance of such music was specialized by the Academy of Ancient Music and later at the Concerts of Antient Music series, where the work of select 16th and 17th composers was featured, [20] especially George Frideric Handel . [15] [n 6] In France, the reign of Louis XIV ( r. 1638–1715) saw a cultural renaissance, by the end of which writers such as Molière , Jean de La Fontaine and Jean Racine were considered to have surpassed the achievements of classical antiquity. [21] They were thus characterized as "classical", as was the music of Jean-Baptiste Lully (and later Christoph Willibald Gluck ), being designated as "l'opéra française classique". [21] In the rest of continental Europe , the abandonment of defining "classical" as analogous to the Greco-Roman World was slower, primarily because the formation of canonical repertoires was either minimal or exclusive to the upper classes. [15] Many European commentators of the early 19th century found new unification in their definition of classical music: to juxtapose the older composers Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart , Joseph Haydn , and (excluding some of his later works ) Ludwig van Beethoven as "classical" against the emerging style of Romantic music . [22] [23] [24] These three composers in particular were grouped into the First Viennese School , sometimes called the "Viennese classics", [n 7] a coupling that remains problematic by reason of none of the three being born in Vienna and the minimal time Haydn and Mozart spent in the city. [25] While this was an often expressed characterization, it was not a strict one. In 1879 the composer Charles Kensington Salaman defined the following composers as classical: Bach , Handel, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Weber , Spohr and Mendelssohn . [26] More broadly, some writers used the term "classical" to generally praise well-regarded outputs from various composers, particularly those who produced many works in an established genre. [11] [n 8] Contemporary understanding[ edit ] The contemporary understanding of the term "classical music" remains vague and multifaceted. [31] [32] Other terms such as "art music", "canonic music", "cultivated music" and "serious music" are largely synonymous. [33] The term "classical music" is often indicated or implied to concern solely the Western world , [34] and conversely, in many academic histories the term "Western music" excludes non-classical Western music. [35] [n 9] Another complication lies in that "classical music" is sometimes used to describe non-Western art music exhibiting similar long-lasting and complex characteristics; examples include Indian classical music (i.e. Carnatic Music Hindustani music and Odissi  Music ), Gamelan music, and various styles of the court of Imperial China (see yayue for instance). [1] Thus in the later 20th century terms such as "Western classical music" and "Western art music" came in use to address this. [34] The musicologist Ralph P. Locke notes that neither term is ideal, as they create an "intriguing complication" when considering "certain practitioners of Western-art music genres who come from non-Western cultures". [37] [n 10] Complexity in musical form and harmonic organization are typical traits of classical music. [1] The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) offers three definitions for the word "classical" in relation to music: [27] "of acknowledged excellence" "of, relating to, or characteristic of a formal musical tradition, as distinguished from popular or folk music" and more specifically, "of or relating to formal European music of the late 18th and early 19th centuries, characterized by harmony, balance, and adherence to established compositional forms". The last definition concerns what is now termed the Classical period , a specific stylistic era of European music from the second half of the 18th century to the beginning of the 19th century. [38] Further information: Ancient music , Music of ancient Greece , and Music of ancient Rome The Western classical tradition formally begins with music created by and for the early Christian Church. [39] It is probable that the early Church wished to disassociate itself from the predominant music of ancient Greece and Rome , as it was a reminder of the pagan religion it had persecuted and by which it had been persecuted . [39] As such, it remains unclear as to what extent the music of the Christian Church, and thus Western classical music as a whole, was influenced by preceding ancient music . [40] The general attitude towards music was adopted from the Ancient Greek and Roman music theorists and commentators. [41] [n 11] Just as in Greco-Roman society, music was considered central to education; along with arithmetic, geometry and astronomy, music was included in the quadrivium , the four subjects of the upper division of a standard liberal arts education in the Middle Ages . [43] This high regard for music was first promoted by the scholars Cassiodorus , Isidore of Seville , [44] and particularly Boethius , [45] whose transmission and expansion on the perspectives of music from Pythagoras , Aristotle and Plato were crucial in the development of medieval musical thought. [46] However, scholars, medieval music theorists and composers regularly misinterpreted or misunderstood the writings of their Greek and Roman predecessors. [47] This was due to the complete absence of surviving Greco-Roman musical works available to medieval musicians, [47] [n 12] to the extent that Isidore of Seville ( c. 559 – 636) stated "unless sounds are remembered by man, they perish, for they cannot be written down", unaware of the systematic notational practices of Ancient Greece centuries before. [48] [n 13] The musicologist Gustave Reese notes, however, that many Greco-Roman texts can still be credited as influential to Western classical music, since medieval musicians regularly read their works—regardless of whether they were doing so correctly. [47] However, there are some indisputable musical continuations from the ancient world . [49] Basic aspects such as monophony , improvisation and the dominance of text in musical settings are prominent in both early medieval and music of nearly all ancient civilizations. [50] Greek influences in particular include the church modes (which were descendants of developments by Aristoxenus and Pythagoras), [51] basic acoustical theory from pythagorean tuning , [40] as well as the central function of tetrachords . [52] Ancient Greek instruments such as the aulos (a reed instrument ) and the lyre (a stringed instrument similar to a small harp ) eventually led to several modern-day instruments of a symphonic orchestra. [53] However, Donald Jay Grout notes that attempting to create a direct evolutionary connection from the ancient music to early medieval is baseless, as it was almost solely influenced by Greco-Roman music theory, not performance or practice. [54] Musician playing the vielle (fourteenth-century Medieval manuscript ) Medieval music includes Western European music from after the fall of the Western Roman Empire by 476 to about 1400. Monophonic chant, also called plainsong or Gregorian chant , was the dominant form until about 1100. [55] Christian monks developed the first forms of European musical notation in order to standardize liturgy throughout the Church. [56] [57] Polyphonic (multi-voiced) music developed from monophonic chant throughout the late Middle Ages and into the Renaissance , including the more complex voicings of motets . During the earlier medieval period , the vocal music from the liturgical genre, predominantly Gregorian chant , was monophonic , using a single, unaccompanied vocal melody line. [58] Polyphonic vocal genres, which used multiple independent vocal melodies, began to develop during the high medieval era , becoming prevalent by the later 13th and early 14th century. Notable Medieval composers include Hildegard of Bingen , Léonin , Pérotin , Philippe de Vitry , Guillaume de Machaut , Francesco Landini , and Johannes Ciconia . Many medieval musical instruments still exist, but in different forms. Medieval instruments included the flute , the recorder and plucked string instruments like the lute . As well, early versions of the organ and fiddle (or vielle ) existed. Medieval instruments in Europe had most commonly been used singly, often self accompanied with a drone note, or occasionally in parts. From at least as early as the 13th century through the 15th century there was a division of instruments into haut (loud, shrill, outdoor instruments) and bas (quieter, more intimate instruments). [59] See also: List of Renaissance composers The musical Renaissance era lasted from 1400 to 1600. It was characterized by greater use of instrumentation , multiple interweaving melodic lines, and the use of earlier forms of bass instruments . Social dancing became more widespread, so musical forms appropriate to accompanying dance began to standardize. It is in this time that the notation of music on a staff and other elements of musical notation began to take shape. [60] This invention made possible the separation of the composition of a piece of music from its transmission; without written music, transmission was oral, and subject to change every time it was transmitted. With a musical score , a work of music could be performed without the composer's presence. [61] The invention of the movable-type printing press in the 15th century had far-reaching consequences on the preservation and transmission of music. [62] An illuminated opening from the Chigi codex featuring the Kyrie of Ockeghem 's Missa Ecce ancilla Domini Many instruments originated during the Renaissance; others were variations of, or improvements upon, instruments that had existed previously. Some have survived to the present day; others have disappeared, only to be re-created in order to perform music on period instruments. As in the modern day, instruments may be classified as brass, strings, percussion, and woodwind. Brass instruments in the Renaissance were traditionally played by professionals who were members of Guilds and they included the slide trumpet , the wooden cornet , the valveless trumpet and the sackbut . Stringed instruments included the viol , the rebec , the harp-like lyre , the hurdy-gurdy , the lute , the guitar , the cittern , the bandora , and the orpharion . Keyboard instruments with strings included the harpsichord and the clavichord . Percussion instruments include the triangle , the Jew's harp , the tambourine , the bells, the rumble-pot, and various kinds of drums. Woodwind instruments included the double-reed shawm (an early member of the oboe family), the reed pipe , the bagpipe , the transverse flute , the recorder , the dulcian , and the crumhorn . Simple pipe organs existed, but were largely confined to churches, although there were portable varieties. [63] Printing enabled the standardization of descriptions and specifications of instruments, as well as instruction in their use. [64] Vocal music in the Renaissance is noted for the flourishing of an increasingly elaborate polyphonic style. The principal liturgical forms which endured throughout the entire Renaissance period were masses and motets, with some other developments towards the end, especially as composers of sacred music began to adopt secular forms (such as the madrigal ) for their own designs. Towards the end of the period, the early dramatic precursors of opera such as monody, the madrigal comedy , and the intermedio are seen. Around 1597, Italian composer Jacopo Peri wrote Dafne , the first work to be called an opera today. He also composed Euridice , the first opera to have survived to the present day. Common-practice period[ edit ] The common practice period is typically defined as the era between the formation and the dissolution of common-practice tonality .[ citation needed ] The term usually spans roughly two-and-a-half centuries, encompassing the Baroque, Classical, and Romantic periods. Baroque instruments including hurdy-gurdy , harpsichord , bass viol , lute , violin , and baroque guitar Baroque music is characterized by the use of complex tonal counterpoint and the use of a basso continuo , a continuous bass line. Music became more complex in comparison with the simple songs of all previous periods. [65] The beginnings of the sonata form took shape in the canzona , as did a more formalized notion of theme and variations . The tonalities of major and minor as means for managing dissonance and chromaticism in music took full shape. [66] During the Baroque era, keyboard music played on the harpsichord and pipe organ became increasingly popular, and the violin family of stringed instruments took the form generally seen today. Opera as a staged musical drama began to differentiate itself from earlier musical and dramatic forms, and vocal forms like the cantata and oratorio became more common. [67] For the first time, vocalists began adding ornamentals to the music. [65] The theories surrounding equal temperament began to be put in wider practice, as it enabled a wider range of chromatic possibilities in hard-to-tune keyboard instruments. Although J.S. Bach did not use equal temperament, changes in the temperaments from the then-common meantone system to various temperaments that made modulation between all keys musically acceptable made possible his Well-Tempered Clavier . [68] Baroque instruments included some instruments from the earlier periods (e.g., the hurdy-gurdy and recorder) and a number of new instruments (e.g., the oboe, bassoon, cello, contrabass and fortepiano). Some instruments from previous eras fell into disuse, such as the shawm, cittern , rackett , and the wooden cornet. The key Baroque instruments for strings included the violin , viol , viola , viola d'amore , cello , contrabass , lute , theorbo (which often played the basso continuo parts), mandolin , Baroque guitar , harp and hurdy-gurdy. Woodwinds included the Baroque flute , Baroque oboe , recorder and the bassoon . Brass instruments included the cornett , natural horn , natural trumpet , serpent and the trombone . Keyboard instruments included the clavichord , the tangent piano , the harpsichord , the pipe organ , and, later in the period, the fortepiano (an early version of the piano). Percussion instruments included the timpani , snare drum , tambourine and the castanets . One major difference between Baroque music and the classical era that followed it is that the types of instruments used in Baroque ensembles were much less standardized. A Baroque ensemble could include one of several different types of keyboard instruments (e.g., pipe organ or harpsichord), [69] additional stringed chordal instruments (e.g., a lute), bowed strings, woodwinds, and brass instruments, and an unspecified number of bass instruments performing the basso continuo,(e.g., a cello, contrabass, viola, bassoon, serpent, etc.). Vocal oeuvres of the Baroque era included suites such as oratorios and cantatas . [70] [71] Secular music was less common, and was typically characterized only by instrumental music. Like Baroque art , [72] themes were generally sacred and for the purpose of a catholic setting. Joseph Haydn (1732–1809), portrayed by Thomas Hardy (1791) Though the term "classical music" includes all Western art music from the Medieval era to the early 2010s, the Classical Era was the period of Western art music from the 1750s to the early 1820s [73] —the era of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart , Joseph Haydn , and Ludwig van Beethoven . The Classical era established many of the norms of composition, presentation, and style, and when the piano became the predominant keyboard instrument. The basic forces required for an orchestra became somewhat standardized (though they would grow as the potential of a wider array of instruments was developed). Chamber music grew to include ensembles with as many as 8-10 performers for serenades . Opera continued to develop, with regional styles in Italy, France, and German-speaking lands. The opera buffa , a form of comic opera, rose in popularity. The symphony came into its own as a musical form, and the concerto was developed as a vehicle for displays of virtuoso playing skill. Orchestras no longer required a harpsichord , and were often led by the lead violinist (now called the concertmaster ). [74] Classical era musicians continued to use many of the instruments from the Baroque era, such as the cello, contrabass, recorder, trombone, timpani, fortepiano (the precursor to the modern piano ) and organ. While some Baroque instruments fell into disuse e.g. the theorbo and rackett, many Baroque instruments were changed into the versions still in use today, such as the Baroque violin (which became the violin ), Baroque oboe (which became the oboe ) and Baroque trumpet, which transitioned to the regular valved trumpet. During the Classical era, the stringed instruments used in orchestra and chamber music such as string quartets were standardized as the four instruments which form the string section of the orchestra: the violin, viola, cello, and double bass. Baroque-era stringed instruments such as fretted, bowed viols were phased out. Woodwinds included the basset clarinet , basset horn , clarinette d'amour , the Classical clarinet , the chalumeau , the flute, oboe and bassoon. Keyboard instruments included the clavichord and the fortepiano . While the harpsichord was still used in basso continuo accompaniment in the 1750s and 1760s, it fell out of use at the end of the century. Brass instruments included the buccin , the ophicleide (a replacement for the bass serpent , which was the precursor of the tuba ) and the natural horn . Wind instruments became more refined in the Classical era. While double-reed instruments like the oboe and bassoon became somewhat standardized in the Baroque, the clarinet family of single reeds was not widely used until Mozart expanded its role in orchestral, chamber, and concerto settings. [75] Josef Danhauser 's 1840 painting of Franz Liszt at the piano surrounded by (from left to right) Alexandre Dumas , Hector Berlioz , George Sand , Niccolò Paganini , Gioachino Rossini , and Marie d'Agoult with a bust of Ludwig van Beethoven on the piano The music of the Romantic era , from roughly the first decade of the 19th century to the early 20th century, was characterized by increased attention to an extended melodic line, as well as expressive and emotional elements, paralleling romanticism in other art forms. Musical forms began to break from the Classical era forms (even as those were being codified), with free-form pieces like nocturnes , fantasias , and preludes being written where accepted ideas about the exposition and development of themes were ignored or minimized. [76] The music became more chromatic, dissonant, and tonally colorful, with tensions (with respect to accepted norms of the older forms) about key signatures increasing. [77] The art song (or Lied) came to maturity in this era, as did the epic scales of grand opera , ultimately transcended by Richard Wagner 's Ring cycle . [78] In the 19th century, musical institutions emerged from the control of wealthy patrons, as composers and musicians could construct lives independent of the nobility. Increasing interest in music by the growing middle classes throughout western Europe spurred the creation of organizations for the teaching, performance, and preservation of music. The piano, which achieved its modern construction in this era (in part due to industrial advances in metallurgy ) became widely popular with the middle class, whose demands for the instrument spurred many piano builders. Many symphony orchestras date their founding to this era. [77] Some musicians and composers were the stars of the day; some, like Franz Liszt and Niccolò Paganini , fulfilled both roles. [79] European cultural ideas and institutions began to follow colonial expansion into other parts of the world. There was also a rise, especially toward the end of the era, of nationalism in music (echoing, in some cases, political sentiments of the time), as composers such as Edvard Grieg , Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov , and Antonín Dvořák echoed traditional music of their homelands in their compositions. [80] In the Romantic era, the modern piano , with a more powerful, sustained tone and a wider range took over from the more delicate-sounding fortepiano. In the orchestra, the existing Classical instruments and sections were retained ( string section , woodwinds, brass, and percussion), but these sections were typically expanded to make a fuller, bigger sound. For example, while a Baroque orchestra may have had two double bass players, a Romantic orchestra could have as many as ten. "As music grew more expressive, the standard orchestral palette just wasn't rich enough for many Romantic composers." [81] The families of instruments used, especially in orchestras, grew larger; a process that climaxed in the early 20th century with very large orchestras used by late romantic and modernist composers. A wider array of percussion instruments began to appear. Brass instruments took on larger roles, as the introduction of rotary valves made it possible for them to play a wider range of notes. The size of the orchestra (typically around 40 in the Classical era) grew to be over 100. [77] Gustav Mahler 's 1906 Symphony No. 8 , for example, has been performed with over 150 instrumentalists and choirs of over 400. [82] New woodwind instruments were added, such as the contrabassoon , bass clarinet and piccolo and new percussion instruments were added, including xylophones , snare drums , celestas (a bell-like keyboard instrument), bells , and triangles , [81] large orchestral harps , and even wind machines for sound effects . Saxophones appear in some scores from the late 19th century onwards, usually featured as a solo instrument rather than as in integral part of the orchestra. The Wagner tuba , a modified member of the horn family, appears in Richard Wagner 's cycle Der Ring des Nibelungen . It also has a prominent role in Anton Bruckner 's Symphony No. 7 in E Major and is also used in several late romantic and modernist works by Richard Strauss, Béla Bartók , and others [83] Cornets appear regularly in 19th century scores, alongside trumpets which were regarded as less agile, at least until the end of the century. Main article: Modernism (music) Encompassing a wide variety of post-Romantic styles, modernist classical music includes late romantic, impressionist, expressionist, and neoclassical styles of composition. Modernism marked an era when many composers rejected certain values of the common practice period, such as traditional tonality, melody, instrumentation, and structure. Some music historians regard musical modernism as an era extending from about 1890 to 1930. [84] [85] Others consider that modernism ended with one or the other of the two world wars. [86] Still other authorities claim that modernism is not associated with any historical era, but rather is "an attitude of the composer; a living construct that can evolve with the times". [87] Despite its decline in the last third of the 20th century, there remained at the end of the century an active core of composers who continued to advance the ideas and forms of modernism, such as Pierre Boulez , Pauline Oliveros , Toru Takemitsu , George Benjamin , Jacob Druckman , Brian Ferneyhough , George Perle , Wolfgang Rihm , Richard Wernick , Richard Wilson , and Ralph Shapey . [88] Two musical movements that were dominant during this time were the impressionist beginning around 1890 and the expressionist that started around 1908. It was a period of diverse reactions in challenging and reinterpreting older categories of music, innovations that lead to new ways of organizing and approaching harmonic, melodic, sonic, and rhythmic aspects of music, and changes in aesthetic worldviews in close relation to the larger identifiable period of modernism in the arts of the time. The operative word most associated with it is "innovation". [89] Its leading feature is a "linguistic plurality", which is to say that no single music genre ever assumed a dominant position. [90] The orchestra continued to grow during the early years modernist era, peaking in the first two decades of the 20th century. Saxophones that appeared only rarely during the 19th century became more commonly used as supplementary instruments, but never became core members of the orchestra. While appearing only as featured solo instruments in some works, for example Maurice Ravel 's orchestration of Modest Mussorgsky 's Pictures at an Exhibition and Sergei Rachmaninoff 's Symphonic Dances , the saxophone is included in other works such as Sergei Prokofiev 's Romeo and Juliet Suites 1 and 2 and many other works as a member of the orchestral ensemble. In some compositions such as Ravel's Boléro , two or more saxophones of different sizes are used to create an entire section like the other sections of the orchestra. The euphonium is featured in a few late Romantic and 20th century works, usually playing parts marked "tenor tuba", including Gustav Holst 's The Planets , and Richard Strauss 's Ein Heldenleben . See also: High modernism , List of 20th-century classical composers , and List of 21st-century classical composers Postmodern music is a period of music that began as early as 1930 according to some authorities. [84] [85] It shares characteristics with postmodernist art – that is, art that comes after and reacts against modernism . Some other authorities have more or less equated postmodern music with the "contemporary music" composed well after 1930, from the late 20th century through to the early 21st century. [91] [92] Some of the diverse movements of the postmodern/contemporary era include the neoromantic, neomedieval, minimalist, and post minimalist. Contemporary classical music at the beginning of the 21st century was often considered to include all post-1945 musical forms. [93] A generation later, this term now properly refers to the music of today written by composers who are still alive; music that came into prominence in the mid-1970s. It includes different variations of modernist , postmodern , neoromantic , and pluralist music . [88] Performance[ edit ] A string quartet performing for the Mozart Year 2006 in Vienna Performers who have studied classical music extensively are said to be "classically trained". This training may come from private lessons from instrument or voice teachers or from completion of a formal program offered by a Conservatory, college or university, such as a Bachelor of Music or Master of Music degree (which includes individual lessons from professors). In classical music, "...extensive formal music education and training, often to postgraduate [Master's degree] level" is required. [94] Performance of classical music repertoire requires a proficiency in sight-reading and ensemble playing, harmonic principles, strong ear training (to correct and adjust pitches by ear), knowledge of performance practice (e.g., Baroque ornamentation), and a familiarity with the style/musical idiom expected for a given composer or musical work (e.g., a Brahms symphony or a Mozart concerto).[ citation needed ] The key characteristic of European classical music that distinguishes it from popular music , folk music , and some other classical music traditions such as Indian classical music , is that the repertoire tends to be written down in musical notation , creating a musical part or score . This score typically determines details of rhythm, pitch, and, where two or more musicians (whether singers or instrumentalists) are involved, how the various parts are coordinated. The written quality of the music has enabled a high level of complexity within them: fugues , for instance, achieve a remarkable marriage of boldly distinctive melodic lines weaving in counterpoint yet creating a coherent harmonic logic . The use of written notation also preserves a record of the works and enables Classical musicians to perform music from many centuries ago. Although Classical music in the 2000s has lost most of its tradition for musical improvisation , from the Baroque era to the Romantic era, there are examples of performers who could improvise in the style of their era. In the Baroque era, organ performers would improvise preludes , keyboard performers playing harpsichord would improvise chords from the figured bass symbols beneath the bass notes of the basso continuo part and both vocal and instrumental performers would improvise musical ornaments . [95] Johann Sebastian Bach was particularly noted for his complex improvisations. [96] During the Classical era, the composer-performer Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was noted for his ability to improvise melodies in different styles. [97] During the Classical era, some virtuoso soloists would improvise the cadenza sections of a concerto. During the Romantic era, Ludwig van Beethoven would improvise at the piano. [98] Women in classical music[ edit ] Martha Argerich at the Kirchner Cultural Centre , Buenos Aires Almost all of the composers who are described in music textbooks on classical music and whose works are widely performed as part of the standard concert repertoire are male composers, even though there have been a large number of women composers throughout the history of classical music. Musicologist Marcia Citron has asked "[w]hy is music composed by women so marginal to the standard 'classical' repertoire?" [99] Citron "examines the practices and attitudes that have led to the exclusion of women composers from the received ' canon ' of performed musical works". She argues that in the 1800s, women composers typically wrote art songs for performance in small recitals rather than symphonies intended for performance with an orchestra in a large hall, with the latter works being seen as the most important genre for composers; since women composers did not write many symphonies, they were deemed not to be notable as composers. [99] In the "...Concise Oxford History of Music, Clara S[c]humann is one of the only [ sic ] female composers mentioned." [100] Abbey Philips states that "[d]uring the 20th century the women who were composing/playing gained far less attention than their male counterparts." [100] Historically, major professional orchestras have been mostly or entirely composed of musicians who are men. Some of the earliest cases of women being hired in professional orchestras was in the position of harpist . The Vienna Philharmonic , for example, did not accept women to permanent membership until 1997, far later than the other orchestras ranked among the world's top five by Gramophone in 2008. [101] [n 14] The last major orchestra to appoint a woman to a permanent position was the Berlin Philharmonic . [105] As late as February 1996, the Vienna Philharmonic's principal flute, Dieter Flury , told Westdeutscher Rundfunk that accepting women would be "gambling with the emotional unity (emotionelle Geschlossenheit) that this organism currently has". [106] In April 1996, the orchestra's press secretary wrote that "compensating for the expected leaves of absence" of maternity leave would be a problem. [107] In 2013, an article in Mother Jones stated that while "[m]any prestigious orchestras have significant female membership—women outnumber men in the New York Philharmonic 's violin section—and several renowned ensembles, including the National Symphony Orchestra , the Detroit Symphony , and the Minnesota Orchestra, are led by women violinists", the double bass , brass, and percussion sections of major orchestras "...are still predominantly male". [108] A 2014 BBC article stated that the "...introduction of 'blind' auditions , where a prospective instrumentalist performs behind a screen so that the judging panel can exercise no gender or racial prejudice, has seen the gender balance of traditionally male-dominated symphony orchestras gradually shift." [109] Relationship to other music traditions[ edit ] Popular music[ edit ] Classical music has often incorporated elements or material from popular music of the composer's time. Examples include occasional music such as Brahms' use of student drinking songs in his Academic Festival Overture , genres exemplified by Kurt Weill 's The Threepenny Opera , and the influence of jazz on early and mid-20th-century composers including Maurice Ravel , exemplified by the movement entitled "Blues" in his sonata for violin and piano. [110] Some postmodern , minimalist and postminimalist classical composers acknowledge a debt to popular music. [111] [ failed verification ] Numerous examples show influence in the opposite direction, including popular songs based on classical music, the use to which Pachelbel's Canon has been put since the 1970s, and the musical crossover phenomenon, where classical musicians have achieved success in the popular music arena. [112] In heavy metal , a number of lead guitarists (playing electric guitar ), including Ritchie Blackmore and Randy Rhoads , [113] modeled their playing styles on Baroque or Classical-era instrumental music. [114] Folk music[ edit ] Composers of classical music have often made use of folk music (music created by musicians who are commonly not classically trained, often from a purely oral tradition). Some composers, like Dvořák and Smetana , [115] have used folk themes to impart a nationalist flavor to their work, while others like Bartók have used specific themes lifted whole from their folk-music origins. [116] Khachaturian widely incorporated into his work the folk music of his native Armenia , but also other ethnic groups of the Middle East and Eastern Europe. [117] [118] Commercialization[ edit ] With the advent of radio broadcasting and record shop , live classical music performances have been compiled into compilation CDs ( WQXR for Tower Records , 1986). Certain staples of classical music are often used commercially (either in advertising or in movie soundtracks). In television commercials, several passages have become clichéd , particularly the opening of Richard Strauss ' Also sprach Zarathustra (made famous in the film 2001: A Space Odyssey ) and the opening section " O Fortuna " of Carl Orff 's Carmina Burana ; other examples include the " Dies irae " from the Verdi Requiem , Edvard Grieg 's " In the Hall of the Mountain King " from Peer Gynt , the opening bars of Beethoven 's Symphony No. 5 , Aram Khachaturian 's " Sabre Dance ", Wagner 's " Ride of the Valkyries " from Die Walküre , Rimsky-Korsakov 's " Flight of the Bumblebee ", and excerpts of Aaron Copland 's Rodeo .[ citation needed ] Several works from the Golden Age of Animation matched the action to classical music. Notable examples are Walt Disney 's Fantasia , Tom and Jerry 's Johann Mouse , and Warner Bros. ' Rabbit of Seville and What's Opera, Doc? Similarly, movies and television often use standard, clichéd excerpts of classical music to convey refinement or opulence: some of the most-often heard pieces in this category include Bach 's Cello Suite No. 1 , Mozart 's Eine kleine Nachtmusik , Vivaldi 's Four Seasons , Mussorgsky 's Night on Bald Mountain (as orchestrated by Rimsky-Korsakov), and Rossini 's " William Tell Overture ". Shawn Vancour argues the commercialization of classical music in the 1920s may have harmed the music industry . [119] Further information: Music education During the 1990s, several research papers and popular books wrote on what came to be called the " Mozart effect ": an observed temporary, small elevation of scores on spatial reasoning tests as a result of listening to Mozart's music. The approach has been popularized in a book by Don Campbell, and is based on an experiment published in Nature suggesting that listening to Mozart temporarily boosted students' IQ by 8 to 9 points. [120] This popularized version of the theory was expressed succinctly by the New York Times music columnist Alex Ross : "researchers... have determined that listening to Mozart actually makes you smarter." [121] Promoters marketed CDs claimed to induce the effect. Florida passed a law requiring toddlers in state-run schools to listen to classical music every day, and in 1998 the governor of Georgia budgeted $105,000 per year to provide every child born in Georgia with a tape or CD of classical music. One of the co-authors of the original studies of the Mozart effect commented "I don't think it can hurt. I'm all for exposing children to wonderful cultural experiences. But I do think the money could be better spent on music education programs." [122] Notes[ edit ] ^ The Ancient Roman citizenship classes in question were derived from the guidelines set forth by the legendary king Servius Tullius in the Servian constitution . [12] ^ In 1690, many decades after Cotgrave's 1611 definition, Antoine Furetière 's posthumous Dictionnaire universel echoed Aulus Gellius in praising Cicero , Julius Caesar , Sallust , Virgil , and Horace and referring to them as classique. [13] ^ This is why the Neoclassicism movement of the mid 18th-century was widespread in fields such as architecture and painting but not music. [16] ^ Before the beginning of the 18th-century, there was a brief flowering of court music following the Stuart Restoration . [11] Composers such as Matthew Locke and later Henry Purcell found considerable success, [17] particularly with the popular court masques . [18] ^ John Banister 's concerts quickly gained popularity, allowing him to later move his venue to Lincoln's Inn Fields , and then Essex Street ; at its peak, his ensemble consisted of nearly 50 musicians. [19] ^ For further information on the development of a classical music canon in 18th-century England, see Weber, William (Autumn 1994). "The Intellectual Origins of Musical Canon in Eighteenth-Century England". Journal of the American Musicological Society . 47 (3): 488–520. doi : 10.2307/3128800 . JSTOR 3128800 . ^ Some critics, from the 19th to 21st centuries, defined the First Viennese School in different ways. Commentators such as Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and later Ludwig Finscher excluded Beethoven from the school entirely, while the musicologist Friedrich Blume included all three in addition to Franz Schubert . [22] Charles Rosen included Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven, but only their instrumental music. [22] ^ The earliest use of the term "classical music" in English literature given by the Oxford English Dictionary (OED) is in the 1829 diary of English musician Vincent Novello , who said "This is the place I should come to every Sunday when I wished to hear classical music correctly and judiciously performed". [27] However, this is predated by at least 9 years from the title of the English writer John Feltham Danneley 's 1820 Introduction to the Elementary Principles of Thorough Bass and Classical Music. [28] [29] A search in Google Books gives at least three uses of the term "classical music" in the first half of the 18th-century. [30] ^ In addition to the title of Taruskin 2005 , see also, the titles of Grout 1973 , Hanning 2002 and Stolba 1998 , all of which include the term "Western music" but essentially exclude non-classical music in the Western world. Grout 1973 was first published in 1960, and it was not until the fifth edition prepared by Claude V. Palisca in 1996 that any information on jazz and popular music was included. [36] ^ The musicologist Ralph P. Locke cites composer Tan Dun as an example, and notes the title of a 2004 publication, Locating East Asia in Western Art Music. [37] See also the title of Barone, Joshua (23 July 2021). "Asian Composers Reflect on Careers in Western Classical Music" . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Burkholder, Grout & Palisca 2014 , p. 1009 note that "We may well wonder whether the term "Western [classical] music" is still appropriate when Western culture has spread around the world, and some of the most practices performers and interesting new composers come from China, Japan and Korea. Given its global reach, it may be time to rename this tradition, but as eclectic and diverse as it has become, its roots are still in Western culture reaching back through Europe to ancient Greece". ^ From all available evidence, it appears that no, or few, significant musical developments can be credited to Ancient Rome, who largely adopted the practices of their Ancient Greek predecessors. [42] ^ Musicologist Donald Jay Grout notes that even by the 20th century there were only fragments and a few more sizable examples of such Greco-Roman music that survive. [39] ^ The entirety of early medieval Europe may not have been without a notional system for music, see Gampel 2012 , who argues against the traditional conclusion of Isidore of Seville's remark. ^ In 1997, the Vienna Philharmonic was "facing protests during a [US] tour" by the National Organization for Women and the International Alliance for Women in Music . Finally, "after being held up to increasing ridicule even in socially conservative Austria, members of the orchestra gathered [on 28 February 1997] in an extraordinary meeting on the eve of their departure and agreed to admit a woman, Anna Lelkes, as harpist." [102] As of 2013, the orchestra has six female members; one of them, violinist Albena Danailova became one of the orchestra's concertmasters in 2008, the first woman to hold that position. [103] In 2012, women still made up just 6% of the orchestra's membership. VPO president Clemens Hellsberg said the VPO now uses completely screened blind auditions . [104]
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Music genre For other uses, see Folk music (disambiguation) . "Folk singer" and "Traditional music" redirect here. For other uses, see Folk singer (disambiguation) and Traditional music (disambiguation) . Folk music Béla Bartók recording peasant singers in Zobordarázs, Kingdom of Hungary , (now Nitra , Slovakia ) 1907 Traditions Filk music Folk music is a music genre that includes traditional folk music and the contemporary genre that evolved from the former during the 20th-century folk revival . Some types of folk music may be called world music . Traditional folk music has been defined in several ways: as music transmitted orally, music with unknown composers, music that is played on traditional instruments, music about cultural or national identity, music that changes between generations (folk process), music associated with a people's folklore , or music performed by custom over a long period of time. It has been contrasted with commercial and classical styles . The term originated in the 19th century, but folk music extends beyond that. Starting in the mid-20th century, a new form of popular folk music evolved from traditional folk music. This process and period is called the (second) folk revival and reached a zenith in the 1960s. This form of music is sometimes called contemporary folk music or folk revival music to distinguish it from earlier folk forms. [1] Smaller, similar revivals have occurred elsewhere in the world at other times, but the term folk music has typically not been applied to the new music created during those revivals. This type of folk music also includes fusion genres such as folk rock , folk metal , and others. While contemporary folk music is a genre generally distinct from traditional folk music, in U.S. English it shares the same name, and it often shares the same performers and venues as traditional folk music. Traditional folk music[ edit ] Definition[ edit ] The terms folk music, folk song, and folk dance are comparatively recent expressions. They are extensions of the term folklore , which was coined in 1846 by the English antiquarian William Thoms to describe "the traditions, customs, and superstitions of the uncultured classes". [2] The term further derives from the German expression volk , in the sense of "the people as a whole" as applied to popular and national music by Johann Gottfried Herder and the German Romantics over half a century earlier. [3] Though it is understood that folk music is the music of the people, observers find a more precise definition to be elusive. [4] [5] Some do not even agree that the term folk music should be used. [4] Folk music may tend to have certain characteristics [2] but it cannot clearly be differentiated in purely musical terms. One meaning often given is that of "old songs, with no known composers," [6] another is that of music that has been submitted to an evolutionary "process of oral transmission ... the fashioning and re-fashioning of the music by the community that give it its folk character." [7] Such definitions depend upon "(cultural) processes rather than abstract musical types...", upon "continuity and oral transmission...seen as characterizing one side of a cultural dichotomy, the other side of which is found not only in the lower layers of feudal, capitalist and some oriental societies but also in 'primitive' societies and in parts of 'popular cultures'". [8] One widely used definition is simply "Folk music is what the people sing." [9] For Scholes, [2] as well as for Cecil Sharp and Béla Bartók , [10] there was a sense of the music of the country as distinct from that of the town. Folk music was already, "...seen as the authentic expression of a way of life now past or about to disappear (or in some cases, to be preserved or somehow revived)," [11] particularly in "a community uninfluenced by art music" [7] and by commercial and printed song. Lloyd rejected this in favor of a simple distinction of economic class [10] yet for him, true folk music was, in Charles Seeger 's words, "associated with a lower class" [12] in culturally and socially stratified societies. In these terms, folk music may be seen as part of a "schema comprising four musical types: 'primitive' or 'tribal'; 'elite' or 'art'; 'folk'; and 'popular'." [13] Music in this genre is also often called traditional music. Although the term is usually only descriptive, in some cases people use it as the name of a genre. For example, the Grammy Award previously used the terms "traditional music" and "traditional folk" for folk music that is not contemporary folk music. [14] Folk music may include most indigenous music . [4] Viljandi Folk Music Festival held annually within the castle ruins in Viljandi , Estonia. From a historical perspective, traditional folk music had these characteristics: [12] It was transmitted through an oral tradition . Before the 20th century, ordinary people were usually illiterate; they acquired songs by memorizing them. Primarily, this was not mediated by books or recorded or transmitted media. Singers may extend their repertoire using broadsheets or song books , but these secondary enhancements are of the same character as the primary songs experienced in the flesh. The music was often related to national culture . It was culturally particular; from a particular region or culture. In the context of an immigrant group, folk music acquires an extra dimension for social cohesion. It is particularly conspicuous in immigrant societies, where Greek Australians , Somali Americans , Punjabi Canadians , and others strive to emphasize their differences from the mainstream. They learn songs and dances that originate in the countries their grandparents came from. They commemorate historical and personal events. On certain days of the year, including such holidays as Christmas, Easter, and May Day, particular songs celebrate the yearly cycle. Birthdays, weddings, and funerals may also be noted with songs, dances and special costumes. Religious festivals often have a folk music component. Choral music at these events brings children and non-professional singers to participate in a public arena, giving an emotional bonding that is unrelated to the aesthetic qualities of the music. The songs have been performed, by custom , over a long period of time, usually several generations . As a side-effect, the following characteristics are sometimes present: There is no copyright on the songs. Hundreds of folk songs from the 19th century have known authors but have continued in oral tradition to the point where they are considered traditional for purposes of music publishing. This has become much less frequent since the 1940s. Today, almost every folk song that is recorded is credited with an arranger. Fusion of cultures: Because cultures interact and change over time, traditional songs evolving over time may incorporate and reflect influences from disparate cultures. The relevant factors may include instrumentation, tunings , voicings , phrasing , subject matter, and even production methods. Tune[ edit ] In folk music, a tune is a short instrumental piece , a melody , often with repeating sections , and usually played a number of times. [15] A collection of tunes with structural similarities is known as a tune-family . America's Musical Landscape says "the most common form for tunes in folk music is AABB, also known as binary form ." [16] [ page needed ] In some traditions, tunes may be strung together in medleys or " sets ." [17] Origins[ edit ] Indians always distinguished between classical and folk music, though in the past even classical Indian music used to rely on the unwritten transmission of repertoire. Indian Nepali folk musician Navneet Aditya Waiba Throughout most of human prehistory and history, listening to recorded music was not possible. [18] [19] Music was made by common people during both their work and leisure, as well as during religious activities. The work of economic production was often manual and communal. [20] Manual labor often included singing by the workers, which served several practical purposes. [21] It reduced the boredom of repetitive tasks, it kept the rhythm during synchronized pushes and pulls, and it set the pace of many activities such as planting , weeding , reaping , threshing , weaving , and milling . In leisure time , singing and playing musical instruments were common forms of entertainment and history-telling—even more common than today when electrically enabled technologies and widespread literacy make other forms of entertainment and information-sharing competitive. [22] Some believe that folk music originated as art music that was changed and probably debased by oral transmission while reflecting the character of the society that produced it. [2] In many societies, especially preliterate ones, the cultural transmission of folk music requires learning by ear , although notation has evolved in some cultures. [23] Different cultures may have different notions concerning a division between "folk" music on the one hand and of "art" and "court" music on the other. In the proliferation of popular music genres, some traditional folk music became also referred to as " World music " or "Roots music". [24] The English term " folklore ", to describe traditional folk music and dance, entered the vocabulary of many continental European nations, each of which had its folk-song collectors and revivalists. [2] The distinction between "authentic" folk and national and popular song in general has always been loose, particularly in America and Germany [2] – for example, popular songwriters such as Stephen Foster could be termed "folk" in America. [2] [25] The International Folk Music Council definition allows that the term can also apply to music that, "...has originated with an individual composer and has subsequently been absorbed into the unwritten, living tradition of a community. But the term does not cover a song, dance, or tune that has been taken over ready-made and remains unchanged." [26] The post– World War II folk revival in America and in Britain started a new genre, Contemporary Folk Music , and brought an additional meaning to the term "folk music": newly composed songs, fixed in form and by known authors, which imitated some form of traditional music. The popularity of "contemporary folk" recordings caused the appearance of the category "Folk" in the Grammy Awards of 1959; [27] in 1970 the term was dropped in favor of "Best Ethnic or Traditional Recording (including Traditional Blues)", [28] while 1987 brought a distinction between "Best Traditional Folk Recording" and "Best Contemporary Folk Recording". [29] After that, they had a "Traditional music" category that subsequently evolved into others. The term "folk", by the start of the 21st century, could cover singer-songwriters, such as Donovan [30] from Scotland and American Bob Dylan , [31] who emerged in the 1960s and much more. This completed a process to where "folk music" no longer meant only traditional folk music. [6] Armenian traditional musicians Assyrians playing a zurna and a davul , instruments typically used for Assyrian folk music and dance . Traditional folk music often includes sung words , although folk instrumental music occurs commonly in dance music traditions. Narrative verse looms large in the traditional folk music of many cultures. [32] [33] This encompasses such forms as traditional epic poetry , much of which was meant originally for oral performance, sometimes accompanied by instruments. [34] [35] Many epic poems of various cultures were pieced together from shorter pieces of traditional narrative verse, which explains their episodic structure, repetitive elements, and their frequent in medias res plot developments. Other forms of traditional narrative verse relate the outcomes of battles or lament tragedies or natural disasters . [36] Sometimes, as in the triumphant Song of Deborah [37] found in the Biblical Book of Judges , these songs celebrate victory. Laments for lost battles and wars, and the lives lost in them, are equally prominent in many traditions; these laments keep alive the cause for which the battle was fought. [38] [39] The narratives of traditional songs often also remember folk heroes such as John Henry [40] [41] or Robin Hood . [42] Some traditional song narratives recall supernatural events or mysterious deaths. [43] Hymns and other forms of religious music are often of traditional and unknown origin. [44] Western musical notation was originally created to preserve the lines of Gregorian chant , which before its invention was taught as an oral tradition in monastic communities. [45] [46] Traditional songs such as Green grow the rushes, O present religious lore in a mnemonic form, as do Western Christmas carols and similar traditional songs. [47] Work songs frequently feature call and response structures and are designed to enable the laborers who sing them to coordinate their efforts in accordance with the rhythms of the songs. [48] They are frequently, but not invariably, composed. In the American armed forces , a lively oral tradition preserves jody calls ("Duckworth chants") which are sung while soldiers are on the march. [49] Professional sailors made similar use of a large body of sea shanties . [50] [51] Love poetry , often of a tragic or regretful nature, prominently figures in many folk traditions. [52] Nursery rhymes , children’s songs and nonsense verse used to amuse or quiet children also are frequent subjects of traditional songs. [53] Folk song transformations and variations[ edit ] ) Korean traditional musicians Music transmitted by word of mouth through a community, in time, develops many variants, since this transmission cannot produce word-for-word and note-for-note accuracy. In addition, folk singers may choose to modify the songs they hear. For example, the words of " I'm a Man You Don't Meet Every Day " (Roud 975) were written down in a broadside in the 18th century, and seem to have an Irish origin. [54] In 1958 the song was recorded in Canada (My Name is Pat and I'm Proud of That). Scottish traveler Jeannie Robertson from Aberdeen, made the next recorded version in 1961. She has changed it to make reference to "Jock Stewart", one of her relatives, and there are no Irish references. In 1976 Scottish artist Archie Fisher deliberately altered the song to remove the reference to a dog being shot. In 1985 The Pogues took it full circle by restoring the Irish references.[ original research? ] Because variants proliferate naturally, there is generally no "authoritative" version of song. Researchers in traditional songs have encountered countless versions of the Barbara Allen ballad throughout the English-speaking world, and these versions often differ greatly from each other. The original is not known; many versions can lay an equal claim to authenticity. Influential folklorist Cecil Sharp felt that these competing variants of a traditional song would undergo a process of improvement akin to biological natural selection : only those new variants that were the most appealing to ordinary singers would be picked up by others and transmitted onward in time. Thus, over time we would expect each traditional song to become more aesthetically appealing, due to incremental community improvement. Literary interest in the popular ballad form dates back at least to Thomas Percy and William Wordsworth . English Elizabethan and Stuart composers had often evolved their music from folk themes, the classical suite was based upon stylised folk-dances, and Joseph Haydn 's use of folk melodies is noted. But the emergence of the term "folk" coincided with an "outburst of national feeling all over Europe" that was particularly strong at the edges of Europe, where national identity was most asserted. Nationalist composers emerged in Central Europe, Russia, Scandinavia, Spain and Britain: the music of Dvořák , Smetana , Grieg , Rimsky-Korsakov , Brahms , Liszt , de Falla , Wagner , Sibelius , Vaughan Williams , Bartók , and many others drew upon folk melodies.[ citation needed ] Naxi traditional musicians The Steinegger brothers, traditional fifers of Grundlsee , Styria , 1880 While the loss of traditional folk music in the face of the rise of popular music is a worldwide phenomenon, [55] it is not one occurring at a uniform rate throughout the world. [56] The process is most advanced "where industrialization and commercialisation of culture are most advanced" [57] but also occurs more gradually even in settings of lower technological advancement. However, the loss of traditional music is slowed in nations or regions where traditional folk music is a badge of cultural or national identity.[ citation needed ] Early folk music, fieldwork and scholarship[ edit ] Much of what is known about folk music prior to the development of audio recording technology in the 19th century comes from fieldwork and writings of scholars, collectors and proponents. [58] 19th-century Europe[ edit ] Starting in the 19th century, academics and amateur scholars, taking note of the musical traditions being lost, initiated various efforts to preserve the music of the people. [59] One such effort was the collection by Francis James Child in the late 19th century of the texts of over three hundred ballads in the English and Scots traditions (called the Child Ballads ), some of which predated the 16th century. [9] Contemporaneously with Child, the Reverend Sabine Baring-Gould and later Cecil Sharp worked to preserve a great body of English rural traditional song, music and dance, under the aegis of what became and remains the English Folk Dance and Song Society (EFDSS). [60] Sharp campaigned with some success to have English traditional songs (in his own heavily edited and expurgated versions) to be taught to school children in hopes of reviving and prolonging the popularity of those songs. [61] [62] Throughout the 1960s and early to mid-1970s, American scholar Bertrand Harris Bronson published an exhaustive four-volume collection of the then-known variations of both the texts and tunes associated with what came to be known as the Child Canon. [63] He also advanced some significant theories concerning the workings of oral-aural tradition. [64] Similar activity was also under way in other countries. One of the most extensive was perhaps the work done in Riga by Krisjanis Barons , who between the years 1894 and 1915 published six volumes that included the texts of 217,996 Latvian folk songs, the Latvju dainas. [65] In Norway the work of collectors such as Ludvig Mathias Lindeman was extensively used by Edvard Grieg in his Lyric Pieces for piano and in other works, which became immensely popular. [66] Around this time, composers of classical music developed a strong interest in collecting traditional songs, and a number of composers carried out their own field work on traditional music. These included Percy Grainger [67] and Ralph Vaughan Williams [68] in England and Béla Bartók [69] in Hungary. These composers, like many of their predecessors, both made arrangements of folk songs and incorporated traditional material into original classical compositions. [70] [71] North America[ edit ] Locations in Southern and Central Appalachia visited by the British folklorist Cecil Sharp in 1916 (blue), 1917 (green), and 1918 (red). Sharp sought "old world" English and Scottish ballads passed down to the region's inhabitants from their British ancestors. He collected hundreds of such ballads, the most productive areas being the Blue Ridge Mountains of North Carolina and the Cumberland Mountains of Kentucky. The advent of audio recording technology provided folklorists with a revolutionary tool to preserve vanishing musical forms. [72] The earliest American folk music scholars were with the American Folklore Society (AFS), which emerged in the late 1800s. [73] Their studies expanded to include Native American music , but still treated folk music as a historical item preserved in isolated societies as well. [74] In North America, during the 1930s and 1940s, the Library of Congress worked through the offices of traditional music collectors Robert Winslow Gordon , [75] Alan Lomax [76] [77] [78] and others to capture as much North American field material as possible. [79] John Lomax (the father of Alan Lomax) was the first prominent scholar to study distinctly American folk music such as that of cowboys and southern blacks. His first major published work was in 1911, Cowboy Songs and Other Frontier Ballads. [80] and was arguably the most prominent US folk music scholar of his time, notably during the beginnings of the folk music revival in the 1930s and early 1940s. Cecil Sharp also worked in America, recording the traditional songs of the Appalachian Mountains in 1916–1918 in collaboration with Maud Karpeles and Olive Dame Campbell and is considered the first major scholar covering American folk music. [81] Campbell and Sharp are represented under other names by actors in the modern movie Songcatcher . [82] One strong theme amongst folk scholars in the early decades of the 20th century was regionalism , [83] the analysis of the diversity of folk music (and related cultures) based on regions of the US rather than based on a given song's historical roots. [84] [85] Later, a dynamic of class and circumstances was added to this. [86] The most prominent regionalists were literary figures with a particular interest in folklore. [87] [88] Carl Sandburg often traveled the U.S. as a writer and a poet. [89] He also collected songs in his travels and, in 1927, published them in the book The American Songbag . [90] Rachel Donaldson, a historian who worked for Vanderbilt, later stated this about The American Songbird in her analysis of the folk music revival. "In his collections of folk songs, Sandburg added a class dynamic to popular understandings of American folk music. This was the final element of the foundation upon which the early folk music revivalists constructed their own view of Americanism. Sandburg's working-class Americans joined with the ethnically , racially , and regionally diverse citizens that other scholars, public intellectuals, and folklorists celebrated their own definitions of the American folk, definitions that the folk revivalists used in constructing their own understanding of American folk music, and an overarching American identity". [91] Prior to the 1930s, the study of folk music was primarily the province of scholars and collectors. The 1930s saw the beginnings of larger scale themes, commonalities, and linkages in folk music developing in the populace and practitioners as well, often related to the Great Depression . [92] Regionalism and cultural pluralism grew as influences and themes. During this time folk music began to become enmeshed with political and social activism themes and movements. [92] Two related developments were the U.S. Communist Party's interest in folk music as a way to reach and influence Americans, [93] and politically active prominent folk musicians and scholars seeing communism as a possible better system, through the lens of the Great Depression. [94] Woody Guthrie exemplifies songwriters and artists with such an outlook. [95] Folk music festivals proliferated during the 1930s. [96] President Franklin Roosevelt was a fan of folk music, hosted folk concerts at the White House , and often patronized folk festivals. [97] One prominent festival was Sarah Gertrude Knott 's National Folk Festival , established in St. Louis, Missouri in 1934. [98] Under the sponsorship of the Washington Post , the festival was held in Washington, DC at Constitution Hall from 1937 to 1942. [99] The folk music movement, festivals, and the wartime effort were seen as forces for social goods such as democracy, cultural pluralism, and the removal of culture and race-based barriers. [100] Barbara Allen , a traditional English language folk ballad, sung by Hule "Queen" Hines of Florida to John Lomax in 1939 Problems playing this file? See media help . The American folk music revivalists of the 1930s approached folk music in different ways. [101] Three primary schools of thought emerged: "Traditionalists" (e.g. Sarah Gertrude Knott and John Lomax ) emphasized the preservation of songs as artifacts of deceased cultures. "Functional" folklorists (e.g. Botkin and Alan Lomax) maintained that songs only retain relevance when used by those cultures which retain the traditions which birthed those songs. "Left-wing" folk revivalists (e.g. Charles Seeger and Lawrence Gellert) emphasized music's role "in 'people's' struggles for social and political rights". [101] By the end of the 1930s these and others had turned American folk music into a social movement. [101] Sometimes folk musicians became scholars and advocates themselves. For example, Jean Ritchie (1922–2015) was the youngest child of a large family from Viper, Kentucky that had preserved many of the old Appalachian traditional songs. [102] Ritchie, living in a time when the Appalachians had opened up to outside influence, was university educated and ultimately moved to New York City, where she made a number of classic recordings of the family repertoire and published an important compilation of these songs. [103] In January 2012, the American Folklife Center at the Library of Congress , with the Association for Cultural Equity, announced that they would release Lomax's vast archive of 1946 and later recording in digital form. Lomax spent the last 20 years of his life working on an Interactive Multimedia educational computer project he called the Global Jukebox , which included 5,000 hours of sound recordings, 400,000 feet of film, 3,000 videotapes , and 5,000 photographs. [104] As of March 2012, this has been accomplished. Approximately 17,400 of Lomax's recordings from 1946 and later have been made available free online. [105] [106] This material from Alan Lomax's independent archive, begun in 1946, which has been digitized and offered by the Association for Cultural Equity, is "distinct from the thousands of earlier recordings on acetate and aluminum discs he made from 1933 to 1942 under the auspices of the Library of Congress. This earlier collection—which includes the famous Jelly Roll Morton, Woody Guthrie, Lead Belly, and Muddy Waters sessions, as well as Lomax's prodigious collections made in Haiti and Eastern Kentucky (1937) — is the provenance of the American Folklife Center" [105] at the library of Congress. National and regional forms[ edit ] Paban Das Baul , baul singer at Nine Lives concert, 2009 Many Asian civilizations distinguish between art /court/classical styles and "folk" music. [113] [114] For example, the late Alam Lohar is an example of a South Asian singer who was classified as a folk singer. [115] Khunung Eshei/Khuland Eshei is an ancient folk song from India, a country of Asia, of Meiteis of Manipur , that is an example of Asian folk music, and how they put it into its own genre. [116] Folk music of China[ edit ] Further information: Music of China § Folk music , Shijing , and Yuefu Archaeological discoveries date Chinese folk music back 7000 years; [117] it is largely based on the pentatonic scale . [118] Han traditional weddings and funerals usually include a form of oboe called a suona , [119] and apercussive ensembles called a chuigushou . [120] Ensembles consisting of mouth organs ( sheng ), shawms ( suona ), flutes ( dizi ) and percussion instruments (especially yunluo gongs ) are popular in northern villages; [121] their music is descended from the imperial temple music of Beijing, Xi'an , Wutai shan and Tianjin . Xi'an drum music, consisting of wind and percussive instruments, [122] is popular around Xi'an, and has received some commercial popularity outside of China. [123] Another important instrument is the sheng , a type of Chinese pipe , an ancient instrument that is ancestor of all Western free reed instruments, such as the accordion . [124] Parades led by Western-type brass bands are common, often competing in volume with a shawm/chuigushou band. In southern Fujian and Taiwan , Nanyin or Nanguan is a genre of traditional ballads. [125] They are sung by a woman accompanied by a xiao and a pipa , as well as other traditional instruments. [126] The music is generally sorrowful and typically deals with love-stricken people. [127] [128] Further south, in Shantou , Hakka and Chaozhou , zheng ensembles are popular. [129] Sizhu ensembles use flutes and bowed or plucked string instruments to make harmonious and melodious music that has become popular in the West among some listeners. [130] These are popular in Nanjing and Hangzhou , as well as elsewhere along the southern Yangtze area. [131] Jiangnan Sizhu (silk and bamboo music from Jiangnan ) is a style of instrumental music, often played by amateur musicians in tea houses in Shanghai. [132] Guangdong Music or Cantonese Music is instrumental music from Guangzhou and surrounding areas. [133] The music from this region influenced Yueju (Cantonese Opera) music, [134] which would later grow popular during the self-described "Golden Age" of China under the PRC . [135] Folk songs have been recorded since ancient times in China. The term Yuefu was used for a broad range of songs such as ballads, laments, folk songs, love songs, and songs performed at court. [136] China is a vast country, with a multiplicity of linguistic and geographic regions. Folk songs are categorized by geographic region, language type, ethnicity, social function (e.g. work song, ritual song, courting song) and musical type. Modern anthologies collected by Chinese folklorists distinguish between traditional songs, revolutionary songs, and newly-invented songs. [137] The songs of northwest China are known as "flower songs" (hua'er), a reference to beautiful women, while in the past they were notorious for their erotic content. [138] The village "mountain songs" ( shan'ge ) of Jiangsu province were also well-known for their amorous themes. [139] [140] Other regional song traditions include the "strummed lyrics" ( tanci ) of the Lower Yangtze Delta, the Cantonese Wooden Fish tradition (muyu or muk-yu) and the Drum Songs ( guci ) of north China. [141] In the twenty-first century many cherished Chinese folk songs have been inscribed in the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity . [142] In the process, songs once seen as vulgar are now being reconstructed as romantic courtship songs. [143] Regional song competitions, popular in many communities, have promoted professional folk singing as a career, with some individual folk singers having gained national prominence. [144] Traditional folk music of Sri Lanka[ edit ] Main article: Music of Sri Lanka The art, music and dance of Sri Lanka derive from the elements of nature, and have been enjoyed and developed in the Buddhist environment. [145] The music is of several types and uses only a few types of instruments. [146] The folk songs and poems were used in social gatherings to work together. The Indian influenced classical music has grown to be unique. [147] [148] [149] [150] The traditional drama, music and songs of Sinhala Light Music are typically Sri Lankan. [151] The temple paintings and carvings feature birds, elephants, wild animals, flowers, and trees, and the Traditional 18 Dances display the dancing of birds and animals. [152] For example: Mayura Wannama – The dance of the peacock [153] [154] Hanuma Wannama – The dance of the monkey [155] Gajaga Wannama – The dance of the elephant Musical types include: Local drama music includes Kolam [156] and Nadagam types. [157] Kolam music is based on low country tunes primarily to accompany mask dance in exorcism rituals. [158] [159] It is considered less developed/evolved, true to the folk tradition and a preserving of a more ancient artform. [160] It is limited to approximately 3–4 notes and is used by the ordinary people for pleasure and entertainment. [161] Nadagam music is a more developed form of drama influenced from South Indian street drama which was introduced by some south Indian artists. Phillippu Singho from Negombo in 1824 performed "Harishchandra Nadagama" in Hnguranketha which was originally written in the Telingu language. Later "Maname", [162] "Sanda kinduru" [163] and others were introduced. Don Bastian of Dehiwala introduced Noorthy firstly by looking at Indian dramas and then John de Silva developed it as did Ramayanaya in 1886. [164] Sinhala light music is currently the most popular type of music in Sri Lanka and enriched with the influence of folk music, kolam music, nadagam music, noorthy music, film music , classical music, Western music, and others. [165] Some artists visited India to learn music and later started introducing light music. Ananda Samarakone was the pioneer of this [166] [167] and also composed the national anthem. [168] The classical Sinhalese orchestra consists of five categories of instruments, but among the percussion instruments, the drum is essential for dance. [169] The vibrant beat of the rhythm of the drums form the basic of the dance. [170] The dancers' feet bounce off the floor and they leap and swirl in patterns that reflect the complex rhythms of the drum beat. This drum beat may seem simple on the first hearing but it takes a long time to master the intricate rhythms and variations, which the drummer sometimes can bring to a crescendo of intensity. There are six common types of drums falling within 3 styles (one-faced, two-faced, and flat-faced): [171] [172] The typical Sinhala Dance is identified as the Kandyan dance and the Gatabera drum is indispensable to this dance. [173] Yak-bera is the demon drum or the drum used in low country dance in which the dancers wear masks and perform devil dancing, which has become a highly developed form of art. [174] The Daula is a barrel -shaped drum, and it was used as a companion drum with a Thammattama in the past, to keep strict time with the beat. [175] The Thammattama is a flat, two-faced drum. The drummer strikes the drum on the two surfaces on top with sticks, unlike the others where you drum on the sides. This is a companion drum to the aforementioned Dawula. [176] A small double-headed hand drum is used to accompany songs. It is primarily heard in the poetry dances like vannam.[ clarification needed ] The Rabana is a flat-faced circular drum and comes in several sizes. [177] The large Rabana - called the Banku Rabana - has to be placed on the floor like a circular short-legged table and several people (traditionally women) can sit around it and beat on it with both hands. [178] This is used in festivals such as the Sinhalese New Year and ceremonies such as weddings. [179] The resounding beat of the Rabana symbolizes the joyous moods of the occasion. The small Rabana is a form of mobile drum beat since the player carries it wherever the person goes. [180] Other instruments include: The Thalampata – 2 small cymbals joined by a string. [181] The wind section, is dominated by an instrument akin to the clarinet.[ clarification needed ] This is not normally used for dances. This is important to note because the Sinhalese dance is not set to music as the western world knows it; rhythm is king. The flutes of metal such as silver & brass produce shrill music to accompany Kandyan Dances, while the plaintive strains of music of the reed flute may pierce the air in devil-dancing. The conch-shell ( Hakgediya ) is another form of a natural instrument, and the player blows it to announce the opening of ceremonies of grandeur. [182] The Ravanahatha (ravanhatta, rawanhattha, ravanastron or ravana hasta veena) is a bowed fiddle that was once popular in Western India. [183] [184] It is believed to have originated among the Hela civilisation of Sri Lanka in the time of King Ravana. [185] The bowl is made of cut coconut shell, the mouth of which is covered with goat hide. A dandi, made of bamboo, is attached to this shell. [185] The principal strings are two: one of steel and the other of a set of horsehair. The long bow has jingle bells [186] [187] See also: Australian folk music and Indigenous music of Australia Folk song traditions were taken to Australia by early settlers from England, Scotland and Ireland and gained particular foothold in the rural outback . [188] [189] The rhyming songs, poems and tales written in the form of bush ballads often relate to the itinerant and rebellious spirit of Australia in The Bush , and the authors and performers are often referred to as bush bards. [190] The 19th century was the golden age of bush ballads. [191] Several collectors have catalogued the songs including John Meredith whose recording in the 1950s became the basis of the collection in the National Library of Australia . [190] The songs tell personal stories of life in the wide open country of Australia. [192] [193] Typical subjects include mining, raising and droving cattle, sheep shearing , wanderings, war stories, the 1891 Australian shearers' strike , class conflicts between the landless working class and the squatters (landowners), and outlaws such as Ned Kelly , as well as love interests and more modern fare such as trucking . [194] The most famous bush ballad is " Waltzing Matilda ", which has been called "the unofficial national anthem of Australia". [195] Indigenous Australian music includes the music of Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders , who are collectively called Indigenous Australians ; [196] it incorporates a variety of distinctive traditional music styles practiced by Indigenous Australian peoples, as well as a range of contemporary musical styles of and fusion with European traditions as interpreted and performed by indigenous Australian artists. [197] Music has formed an integral part of the social , cultural and ceremonial observances of these peoples, down through the millennia of their individual and collective histories to the present day. [198] [199] The traditional forms include many aspects of performance and musical instruments unique to particular regions or Indigenous Australian groups . [200] Equal elements of musical tradition are common through much of the Australian continent, and even beyond. [201] The culture of the Torres Strait Islanders is related to that of adjacent parts of New Guinea and so their music is also related. Music is a vital part of Indigenous Australians' cultural maintenance. [202] Battlefield Band performing in Freiburg in 2012 Celtic traditional music[ edit ] See also: Folk music of Ireland and Folk music of Scotland Celtic music is a term used by artists, record companies, music stores and music magazines to describe a broad grouping of musical genres that evolved out of the folk musical traditions of the Celtic peoples . [203] These traditions include Irish , Scottish , Manx , Cornish , Welsh , and Breton traditions. [204] Asturian and Galician music is often included, though there is no significant research showing that this has any close musical relationship. [205] [206] Brittany 's Folk revival began in the 1950s with the "bagadoù" and the "kan-ha-diskan" before growing to world fame through Alan Stivell 's work since the mid-1960s. [207] In Scotland , The Corries , [218] Silly Wizard , [219] [220] Capercaillie , [221] Runrig , [222] Jackie Leven , [223] Julie Fowlis , [224] Karine Polwart , [225] Alasdair Roberts , [226] [227] Dick Gaughan , [228] Wolfstone , [229] Boys of the Lough , [230] and The Silencers [231] have kept Scottish folk vibrant and fresh by mixing traditional Scottish and Gaelic folk songs with more contemporary genres. [232] These artists have also been commercially successful in continental Europe and North America. [233] There is an emerging wealth of talent in the Scottish traditional music scene, with bands such as Mànran , [234] Skipinnish , [235] Barluath [236] and Breabach [237] and solo artists such as Patsy Reid, [238] Robyn Stapleton [239] and Mischa MacPherson [240] gaining a lot of success in recent years. [241] Central and Eastern Europe[ edit ] See also: Music of Belarus , Hungarian folk music , Music of Moldova , Russian folk music , Ukrainian folk music , Music of Slovenia , and Czech folklore During the Eastern Bloc era, national folk dancing was actively promoted by the state. [242] Dance troupes from Russia and Poland toured non-communist Europe from about 1937 to 1990. [243] The Red Army Choir recorded many albums, becoming the most popular military band. [244] Eastern Europe is also the origin of the Jewish Klezmer tradition. [245] Ľubomír Párička playing bagpipes, Slovakia German Volkslieder perpetuated by Liederhandschriften manuscripts like Carmina Burana [248] date back to medieval Minnesang and Meistersinger traditions. [249] Those folk songs revived in the late 18th century period of German Romanticism , [250] first promoted by Johann Gottfried Herder [251] [252] and other advocates of the Enlightenment , [253] later compiled by Achim von Arnim [254] and Clemens Brentano ( Des Knaben Wunderhorn ) [255] as well as by Ludwig Uhland . [256] The Volksmusik and folk dances genre, especially in the Alpine regions of Bavaria , Austria , Switzerland ( Kuhreihen ) and South Tyrol , up to today has lingered in rustic communities against the backdrop of industrialisation [257] —Low German shanties or the Wienerlied [258] ( Schrammelmusik ) being notable exceptions. Slovene folk music in Upper Carniola and Styria also originated from the Alpine traditions, like the prolific Lojze Slak Ensemble. [259] Traditional Volksmusik is not to be confused with commercial Volkstümliche Musik , which is a derivation of that. [260] The Hungarian group Muzsikás played numerous American tours [261] and participated in the Hollywood movie The English Patient [262] while the singer Márta Sebestyén worked with the band Deep Forest . [263] The Hungarian táncház movement, started in the 1970s, involves strong cooperation between musicology experts and enthusiastic amateurs. [264] However, traditional Hungarian folk music and folk culture barely survived in some rural areas of Hungary, and it has also begun to disappear among the ethnic Hungarians in Transylvania . The táncház movement revived broader folk traditions of music, dance, and costume together and created a new kind of music club. [265] The movement spread to ethnic Hungarian communities elsewhere in the world. [265] An important part of the whole Balkan folk music is the music of the local Romani ethnic minority, which is called tallava and brass band music. [271] [272] Nordic folk music[ edit ] Latvian men's folk ensemble Vilki, performing at the festival of Baltic crafts and warfare Apuolė 854 in Apuolė , August 2009 See also: Traditional Nordic dance music , Joik , Nyckelharpa , and Baltic psaltery Nordic folk music includes a number of traditions in Northern European, especially Scandinavian, countries. The Nordic countries are generally taken to include Iceland , Norway , Finland , Sweden, Denmark and Greenland . [273] Sometimes it is taken to include the Baltic countries of Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania . [274] Maria Gasolina performing at 2008 Faces Festival in Raseborg , Finland The many regions of the Nordic countries share certain traditions, many of which have diverged significantly, like Psalmodicon of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway. [275] It is possible to group together the Baltic states (or, sometimes, only Estonia) and parts of northwest Russia as sharing cultural similarities, [276] although the relationship has gone cold in recent years. [277] Contrast with Norway, Sweden, Denmark and the Atlantic islands of Iceland and the Faroe Islands, which share virtually no similarities of that kind. Greenland's Inuit culture has its own unique musical traditions. [278] Finland shares many cultural similarities with both the Baltic nations and the Scandinavian nations. The Sami of Sweden, Norway, Finland and Russia have their own unique culture, with ties to the neighboring cultures. [279] Swedish folk music is a genre of music based largely on folkloric collection work that began in the early 19th century in Sweden. [280] The primary instrument of Swedish folk music is the fiddle . [281] Another common instrument , unique to Swedish traditions, is the nyckelharpa . [282] Most Swedish instrumental folk music is dance music ; the signature music and dance form within Swedish folk music is the polska . [283] Vocal and instrumental traditions in Sweden have tended to share tunes historically, though they have been performed separately. [284] Beginning with the folk music revival of the 1970s, vocalists and instrumentalists have also begun to perform together in folk music ensembles . See also: Andean music , Cueca , and Nueva canción The folk music of the Americas consists of the encounter and union of three main musical types: European traditional music, traditional music of the American natives, and tribal African music that arrived with slaves from that continent. The particular case of Latin and South American music points to Andean music [285] among other native musical styles (such as Caribbean [286] and pampean), Iberian music of Spain and Portugal , and generally speaking African tribal music, the three of which fused together evolving in differentiated musical forms in Central and South America. Andean music comes from the region of the Quechuas , Aymaras , and other peoples that inhabit the general area of the Inca Empire prior to European contact. [287] It includes folklore music of parts of Bolivia , Ecuador , [288] Chile, Colombia , Peru and Venezuela . Andean music is popular to different degrees across Latin America, having its core public in rural areas and among indigenous populations. The Nueva Canción movement of the 1970s revived the genre across Latin America and brought it to places where it was unknown or forgotten. Nueva canción (Spanish for 'new song') is a movement and genre within Latin American and Iberian folk music, folk-inspired music, and socially committed music. In some respects its development and role is similar to the second folk music revival in North America. This includes evolution of this new genre from traditional folk music, essentially contemporary folk music except that that English genre term is not commonly applied to it. Nueva cancion is recognized as having played a powerful role in the social upheavals in Portugal, Spain and Latin America during the 1970s and 1980s. Nueva cancion first surfaced during the 1960s as "The Chilean New Song" in Chile. The musical style emerged shortly afterwards in Spain and areas of Latin America where it came to be known under similar names. Nueva canción renewed traditional Latin American folk music, and with its political lyrics it was soon associated with revolutionary movements, the Latin American New Left , Liberation Theology , hippie and human rights movements. It would gain great popularity throughout Latin America, and it is regarded as a precursor to Rock en español . Cueca is a family of musical styles and associated dances from Chile, Bolivia and Peru . Trova and Son are styles of traditional Cuban music originating in the province of Oriente that includes influences from Spanish song and dance, such as Bolero and contradanza as well as Afro-Cuban rhythm and percussion elements. Moda de viola is the name designated to Brazilian folk music. It is often performed with a 6-string nylon acoustic guitar, but the most traditional instrument is the viola caipira . The songs basically detailed the difficulties of life of those who work in the country. The themes are usually associated with the land, animals, folklore, impossible love and separation. Although there are some upbeat songs, most of them are nostalgic and melancholic. See also: Canadian folk music , Music of Canada , and French-Canadian music Canada's traditional folk music is particularly diverse. [289] Even prior to liberalizing its immigration laws in the 1960s, Canada was ethnically diverse with dozens of different Indigenous and European groups present. In terms of music, academics do not speak of a Canadian tradition, but rather ethnic traditions ( Acadian music , Irish-Canadian music , Blackfoot music , Innu music , Inuit music , Métis fiddle , etc.) and later in Eastern Canada regional traditions ( Newfoundland music , Cape Breton fiddling , Quebecois music , etc.) Traditional folk music of European origin has been present in Canada since the arrival of the first French and British settlers in the 16th and 17th centuries....They fished the coastal waters and farmed the shores of what became Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, and the St Lawrence River valley of Quebec. The fur trade and its voyageurs brought this farther north and west into Canada; later lumbering operations and lumberjacks continued this process. Agrarian settlement in eastern and southern Ontario and western Quebec in the early 19th century established a favorable milieu for the survival of many Anglo-Canadian folksongs and broadside ballads from Great Britain and the US. Despite massive industrialization, folk music traditions have persisted in many areas until today. In the north of Ontario, a large Franco-Ontarian population kept folk music of French origin alive. Populous Acadian communities in the Atlantic provinces contributed their song variants to the huge corpus of folk music of French origin centred in the province of Quebec. A rich source of Anglo-Canadian folk music can be found in the Atlantic region, especially Newfoundland. Completing this mosaic of musical folklore is the Gaelic music of Scottish settlements, particularly in Cape Breton, and the hundreds of Irish songs whose presence in eastern Canada dates from the Irish famine of the 1840s, which forced the large migrations of Irish to North America. [289] "Knowledge of the history of Canada ", wrote Isabelle Mills in 1974, "is essential in understanding the mosaic of Canadian folk song. Part of this mosaic is supplied by the folk songs of Canada brought by European and Anglo-Saxon settlers to the new land." [12] She describes how the French colony at Québec brought French immigrants, followed before long by waves of immigrants from Great Britain, Germany, and other European countries, all bringing music from their homelands, some of which survives into the present day. Ethnographer and folklorist Marius Barbeau estimated that well over ten thousand French folk songs and their variants had been collected in Canada. Many of the older ones had by then died out in France. Music as professionalized paid entertainment grew relatively slowly in Canada, especially remote rural areas, through the 19th and early 20th centuries. While in urban music clubs of the dance hall / vaudeville variety became popular, followed by jazz, rural Canada remained mostly a land of traditional music. Yet when American radio networks began broadcasting into Canada in the 1920s and 1930s, the audience for Canadian traditional music progressively declined in favour of American Nashville-style country music and urban styles like jazz. The Americanization of Canadian music led the Canadian Radio League to lobby for a national public broadcaster in the 1930s, eventually leading to the creation of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) in 1936. The CBC promoted Canadian music, including traditional music, on its radio and later television services, but the mid-century craze for all things "modern" led to the decline of folk music relative to rock and pop. Canada was however influenced by the folk music revival of the 1960s, when local venues such as the Montreal Folk Workshop, and other folk clubs and coffee houses across the country, became crucibles for emerging songwriters and performers as well as for interchange with artists visiting from abroad. See also: American folk music American traditional music is also called roots music. Roots music is a broad category of music including bluegrass , country music , gospel , old time music , jug bands , Appalachian folk , blues , Cajun and Native American music . The music is considered American either because it is native to the United States or because it developed there, out of foreign origins, to such a degree that it struck musicologists as something distinctly new. It is considered "roots music" because it served as the basis of music later developed in the United States, including rock and roll , contemporary folk music, rhythm and blues , and jazz . Some of these genres are considered to be traditional folk music. Cajun music , an emblematic music of Louisiana , is rooted in the ballads of the French-speaking Acadians of Canada. Cajun music is often mentioned in tandem with the Creole -based, Cajun -influenced zydeco form, both of Acadiana origin. These French Louisiana sounds have influenced American popular music for many decades, especially country music , and have influenced pop culture through mass media, such as television commercials. Appalachian music is the traditional music of the region of Appalachia in the Eastern United States. It derives from various European and African influences, including English ballads , Irish and Scottish traditional music (especially fiddle music), hymns, and African-American blues . First recorded in the 1920s, Appalachian musicians were a key influence on the early development of Old-time music , country music , and bluegrass , and were an important part of the American folk music revival . Instruments typically used to perform Appalachian music include the banjo , American fiddle , fretted dulcimer , and guitar. [290] Early recorded Appalachian musicians include Fiddlin' John Carson , Henry Whitter , Bascom Lamar Lunsford , the Carter Family , Clarence Ashley , Frank Proffitt , and Dock Boggs , all of whom were initially recorded in the 1920s and 1930s. Several Appalachian musicians obtained renown during the folk revival of the 1950s and 1960s, including Jean Ritchie , Roscoe Holcomb , Ola Belle Reed , Lily May Ledford , and Doc Watson . Country and bluegrass artists such as Loretta Lynn , Roy Acuff , Dolly Parton , Earl Scruggs , Chet Atkins , and Don Reno were heavily influenced by traditional Appalachian music. [290] Artists such as Bob Dylan , Dave Van Ronk , Jerry Garcia , and Bruce Springsteen have performed Appalachian songs or rewritten versions of Appalachian songs. The Carter Family was a traditional American folk music group that recorded between 1927 and 1956. Their music had a profound impact on bluegrass , country , Southern gospel , pop and rock musicians. They were the first vocal group to become country music stars; a beginning of the divergence of country music from traditional folk music. Their recordings of such songs as " Wabash Cannonball " (1932), " Will the Circle Be Unbroken " (1935), " Wildwood Flower " (1928), and " Keep On the Sunny Side " (1928) made them country standards. [291] Oklahoma and southern US plains: Before recorded history American Indians in this area used songs and instrumentation; music and dance remain the core of ceremonial and social activities. [292] " Stomp dance " remains at its core, a call and response form; instrumentation is provided by rattles or shackles worn on the legs of women. [292] "Other southeastern nations have their own complexes of sacred and social songs, including those for animal dances and friendship dances, and songs that accompany stickball games. Central to the music of the southern Plains Indians is the drum, which has been called the heartbeat of Plains Indian music. Most of that genre can be traced back to activities of hunting and warfare, upon which plains culture was based." [292] The drum is central to the music of the southern plains Indians. During the reservation period, they used music to relieve boredom. Neighbors gathered, exchanged and created songs and dances; this is a part of the roots of the modern intertribal powwow . Another common instrument is the courting flute . [292] African-American folk music in the area has roots in slavery and emancipation. Sacred music — a capella and instrumentally-accompanied—is at the heart of the tradition. Early spirituals framed Christian beliefs within native practices and were heavily influenced by the music and rhythms of Africa." [292] Spirituals are prominent, and often use a call and response pattern. [292] " Gospel developed after the Civil War (1861–1865). It relied on biblical text for much of its direction, and the use of metaphors and imagery was common. Gospel is a "joyful noise", sometimes accompanied by instrumentation and almost always punctuated by hand clapping, toe tapping, and body movement." [292] " Shape-note or Sacred Harp singing developed in the early 19th century as a way for itinerant singing instructors to teach church songs in rural communities. They taught using song books in which musical notations of tones were represented by geometric shapes that were designed to associate a shape with its pitch. Sacred harp singing became popular in many Oklahoma rural communities, regardless of ethnicity." [292] Later the blues tradition developed, with roots in and parallels to sacred music. [292] Then jazz developed, born from a "blend of ragtime, gospel, and blues" [292] Anglo-Scots-Irish music traditions gained a place in Oklahoma after the Land Run of 1889 . Because of its size and portability, the fiddle was the core of early Oklahoma Anglo music, but other instruments such as the guitar, mandolin , banjo , and steel guitar were added later. Various Oklahoma music traditions trace their roots to the British Isles, including cowboy ballads , western swing , and contemporary country and western ." [292] Mexican immigrants began to reach Oklahoma in the 1870s, bringing beautiful canciones and corridos love songs, waltzes, and ballads along with them. Like American Indian communities, each rite of passage in Hispanic communities is accompanied by traditional music. The acoustic guitar, string bass , and violin provide the basic instrumentation for Mexican music, with maracas , flute, horns , or sometimes accordion filling out the sound. [292] Other Europeans (such as Bohemians and Germans) settled in the late 19th century. Their social activities centered on community halls, "where local musicians played polkas and waltzes on the accordion, piano, and brass instruments ". [292] Later, Asians contributed to the musical mix. "Ancient music and dance traditions from the temples and courts of China , India, and Indonesia are preserved in Asian communities throughout the state, and popular song genres are continually layered on to these classical music forms" [292] Folk music revivals[ edit ] Main article: Roots revival "It's self-perpetuating, regenerative. It's what you'd call a perennial American song. I don't think it needs a revival, resuscitation. It lives and flourishes. It really just needs people who are 18 years old to get exposed to it. But it will go on with or without them. The folk song is more powerful than anything on the radio, than anything that's released...It's that distillation of the voices that goes on for a long, long time, and that's what makes them strong." [293] — Ketch Secor "Folk music revival" refers to either a period of renewed interest in traditional folk music, or to an event or period which transforms it; the latter usually includes a social activism component. A prominent example of the former is the British folk revival of approximately 1890–1920. The most prominent and influential example of the latter (to the extent that it is usually called "the folk music revival") is the folk revival of the mid 20th century, centered in the English-speaking world which gave birth to contemporary folk music. [294] See the " Contemporary folk music " article for a description of this revival. One earlier revival influenced western classical music. Such composers as Percy Grainger , Ralph Vaughan Williams , and Béla Bartók made field recordings or transcriptions of folk singers and musicians. In Spain, Isaac Albéniz (1860–1909) produced piano works reflect his Spanish heritage, including the Suite Iberia (1906–1909). Enrique Granados (1867–1918) composed zarzuela , Spanish light opera, and Danzas Españolas – Spanish Dances. Manuel de Falla (1876–1946) became interested in the cante jondo of Andalusian flamenco , the influence of which can be strongly felt in many of his works, which include Nights in the Gardens of Spain and Siete canciones populares españolas ("Seven Spanish Folksongs", for voice and piano). Composers such as Fernando Sor and Francisco Tarrega established the guitar as Spain's national instrument. Modern Spanish folk artists abound ( Mil i Maria , Russian Red , et al.) modernizing while respecting the traditions of their forebears. Flamenco grew in popularity through the 20th century, as did northern styles such as the Celtic music of Galicia . French classical composers, from Bizet to Ravel , also drew upon Spanish themes, and distinctive Spanish genres became universally recognized. Folk music revivals or roots revivals also encompass a range of phenomena around the world where there is a renewed interest in traditional music. This is often by the young, often in the traditional music of their own country, and often included new incorporation of social awareness, causes, and evolutions of new music in the same style. Nueva canción , a similar evolution of a new form of socially committed music occurred in several Spanish-speaking countries. Contemporary folk music[ edit ]
Main article: Origins of the blues Hart Wand 's " Dallas Blues " was published in 1912; W.C. Handy 's " The Memphis Blues " followed in the same year. The first recording by an African American singer was Mamie Smith 's 1920 rendition of Perry Bradford 's " Crazy Blues ". But the origins of the blues were some decades earlier, probably around 1890. [36] This music is poorly documented, partly because of racial discrimination in U.S. society, including academic circles, [37] and partly because of the low rate of literacy among rural African Americans at the time. [38] Reports of blues music in southern Texas and the Deep South were written at the dawn of the 20th century. Charles Peabody mentioned the appearance of blues music at Clarksdale, Mississippi , and Gate Thomas reported similar songs in southern Texas around 1901–1902. These observations coincide more or less with the recollections of Jelly Roll Morton , who said he first heard blues music in New Orleans in 1902; Ma Rainey , who remembered first hearing the blues in the same year in Missouri ; and W.C. Handy , who first heard the blues in Tutwiler, Mississippi , in 1903. The first extensive research in the field was performed by Howard W. Odum , who published an anthology of folk songs from Lafayette County, Mississippi , and Newton County, Georgia , between 1905 and 1908. [39] The first non-commercial recordings of blues music, termed proto-blues by Paul Oliver , were made by Odum for research purposes at the beginning of the 20th century. They are now lost. [40] Musicologist John Lomax (left) shaking hands with musician "Uncle" Rich Brown in Sumterville, Alabama Other recordings that are still available were made in 1924 by Lawrence Gellert . Later, several recordings were made by Robert W. Gordon , who became head of the Archive of American Folk Songs of the Library of Congress . Gordon's successor at the library was John Lomax . In the 1930s, Lomax and his son Alan made a large number of non-commercial blues recordings that testify to the huge variety of proto-blues styles, such as field hollers and ring shouts . [41] A record of blues music as it existed before 1920 can also be found in the recordings of artists such as Lead Belly [42] and Henry Thomas . [43] All these sources show the existence of many different structures distinct from twelve- , eight- , or sixteen-bar . [44] [45] The social and economic reasons for the appearance of the blues are not fully known. [46] The first appearance of the blues is usually dated after the Emancipation Act of 1863 , [37] between 1860s and 1890s, [2] a period that coincides with post- emancipation and later, the establishment of juke joints as places where African-Americans went to listen to music, dance, or gamble after a hard day's work. [47] This period corresponds to the transition from slavery to sharecropping, small-scale agricultural production, and the expansion of railroads in the southern United States. Several scholars characterize the development of blues music in the early 1900s as a move from group performance to individualized performance. They argue that the development of the blues is associated with the newly acquired freedom of the enslaved people. [48] According to Lawrence Levine, "there was a direct relationship between the national ideological emphasis upon the individual, the popularity of Booker T. Washington's teachings, and the rise of the blues." Levine stated that "psychologically, socially, and economically, African-Americans were being acculturated in a way that would have been impossible during slavery, and it is hardly surprising that their secular music reflected this as much as their religious music did." [48] There are few characteristics common to all blues music, because the genre took its shape from the idiosyncrasies of individual performers. [49] However, there are some characteristics that were present long before the creation of the modern blues. Call-and-response shouts were an early form of blues-like music; they were a "functional expression ... style without accompaniment or harmony and unbounded by the formality of any particular musical structure". [50] A form of this pre-blues was heard in slave ring shouts and field hollers , expanded into "simple solo songs laden with emotional content". [51] Blues has evolved from the unaccompanied vocal music and oral traditions of slaves imported from West Africa and rural blacks into a wide variety of styles and subgenres, with regional variations across the United States. Although blues (as it is now known) can be seen as a musical style based on both European harmonic structure and the African call-and-response tradition that transformed into an interplay of voice and guitar, [52] [53] the blues form itself bears no resemblance to the melodic styles of the West African griots . [54] [55] Additionally, there are theories that the four-beats-per-measure structure of the blues might have its origins in the Native American tradition of pow wow drumming. [56] Some scholars identify strong influences on the blues from the melodic structures of certain West African musical styles of the savanna and sahel. Lucy Durran finds similarities with the melodies of the Bambara people , and to a lesser degree, the Soninke people and Wolof people , but not as much of the Mandinka people . [57] Gerard Kubik finds similarities to the melodic styles of both the west African savanna and central Africa, both of which were sources of enslaved people. [58] No specific African musical form can be identified as the single direct ancestor of the blues. [59] However the call-and-response format can be traced back to the music of Africa . That blue notes predate their use in blues and have an African origin is attested to by "A Negro Love Song", by the English composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor , from his African Suite for Piano, written in 1898, which contains blue third and seventh notes . [60] The Diddley bow (a homemade one-stringed instrument found in parts of the American South sometimes referred to as a jitterbug or a one-string in the early twentieth century) and the banjo are African-derived instruments that may have helped in the transfer of African performance techniques into the early blues instrumental vocabulary. [61] The banjo seems to be directly imported from West African music. It is similar to the musical instrument that griots and other Africans such as the Igbo [62] played (called halam or akonting by African peoples such as the Wolof , Fula and Mandinka ). [63] However, in the 1920s, when country blues began to be recorded, the use of the banjo in blues music was quite marginal and limited to individuals such as Papa Charlie Jackson and later Gus Cannon . [64] Blues music also adopted elements from the "Ethiopian airs", minstrel shows and Negro spirituals , including instrumental and harmonic accompaniment. [65] The style also was closely related to ragtime , which developed at about the same time, though the blues better preserved "the original melodic patterns of African music". [66] The musical forms and styles that are now considered the blues as well as modern country music arose in the same regions of the southern United States during the 19th century. Recorded blues and country music can be found as far back as the 1920s, when the record industry created the marketing categories " race music " and " hillbilly music " to sell music by blacks for blacks and by whites for whites, respectively. At the time, there was no clear musical division between "blues" and "country", except for the ethnicity of the performer, and even that was sometimes documented incorrectly by record companies. [67] [68] Though musicologists can now attempt to define the blues narrowly in terms of certain chord structures and lyric forms thought to have originated in West Africa, audiences originally heard the music in a far more general way: it was simply the music of the rural south, notably the Mississippi Delta . Black and white musicians shared the same repertoire and thought of themselves as " songsters " rather than blues musicians. The notion of blues as a separate genre arose during the black migration from the countryside to urban areas in the 1920s and the simultaneous development of the recording industry. Blues became a code word for a record designed to sell to black listeners. [69] The origins of the blues are closely related to the religious music of Afro-American community, the spirituals . The origins of spirituals go back much further than the blues, usually dating back to the middle of the 18th century, when the slaves were Christianized and began to sing and play Christian hymns , in particular those of Isaac Watts , which were very popular. [70] Before the blues gained its formal definition in terms of chord progressions, it was defined as the secular counterpart of spirituals. It was the low-down music played by rural blacks. [24] Depending on the religious community a musician belonged to, it was more or less considered a sin to play this low-down music: blues was the devil's music. Musicians were therefore segregated into two categories: gospel singers and blues singers, guitar preachers and songsters. However, when rural black music began to be recorded in the 1920s, both categories of musicians used similar techniques: call-and-response patterns, blue notes, and slide guitars. Gospel music was nevertheless using musical forms that were compatible with Christian hymns and therefore less marked by the blues form than its secular counterpart. [24] Pre-war blues[ edit ] The American sheet music publishing industry produced a great deal of ragtime music. By 1912, the sheet music industry had published three popular blues-like compositions, precipitating the Tin Pan Alley adoption of blues elements: "Baby Seals' Blues", by "Baby" Franklin Seals (arranged by Artie Matthews ); "Dallas Blues", by Hart Wand ; and " The Memphis Blues ", by W.C. Handy . [71] Sheet music from " Saint Louis Blues " (1914) Handy was a formally trained musician, composer and arranger who helped to popularize the blues by transcribing and orchestrating blues in an almost symphonic style, with bands and singers. He became a popular and prolific composer, and billed himself as the "Father of the Blues"; however, his compositions can be described as a fusion of blues with ragtime and jazz, a merger facilitated using the Cuban habanera rhythm that had long been a part of ragtime; [23] [72] Handy's signature work was the " Saint Louis Blues ". In the 1920s, the blues became a major element of African American and American popular music, also reaching white audiences via Handy's arrangements and the classic female blues performers.  These female performers became perhaps the first African American "superstars", and their recording sales demonstrated "a huge appetite for records made by and for black people." [73] The blues evolved from informal performances in bars to entertainment in theaters. Blues performances were organized by the Theater Owners Booking Association in nightclubs such as the Cotton Club and juke joints such as the bars along Beale Street in Memphis. Several record companies, such as the American Record Corporation , Okeh Records , and Paramount Records , began to record African-American music. As the recording industry grew, country blues performers like Bo Carter , Jimmie Rodgers , Blind Lemon Jefferson , Lonnie Johnson , Tampa Red and Blind Blake became more popular in the African American community. Kentucky-born Sylvester Weaver was in 1923 the first to record the slide guitar style, in which a guitar is fretted with a knife blade or the sawed-off neck of a bottle. [74] The slide guitar became an important part of the Delta blues . [75] The first blues recordings from the 1920s are categorized as a traditional, rural country blues and a more polished city or urban blues. Country blues performers often improvised, either without accompaniment or with only a banjo or guitar. Regional styles of country blues varied widely in the early 20th century. The (Mississippi) Delta blues was a rootsy sparse style with passionate vocals accompanied by slide guitar. The little-recorded Robert Johnson [76] combined elements of urban and rural blues. In addition to Robert Johnson, influential performers of this style included his predecessors Charley Patton and Son House . Singers such as Blind Willie McTell and Blind Boy Fuller performed in the southeastern "delicate and lyrical" Piedmont blues tradition, which used an elaborate ragtime-based fingerpicking guitar technique. Georgia also had an early slide tradition, [77] with Curley Weaver , Tampa Red , "Barbecue Bob" Hicks and James "Kokomo" Arnold as representatives of this style. [78] The lively Memphis blues style, which developed in the 1920s and 1930s near Memphis, Tennessee , was influenced by jug bands such as the Memphis Jug Band or the Gus Cannon's Jug Stompers . Performers such as Frank Stokes , Sleepy John Estes , Robert Wilkins , Joe McCoy , Casey Bill Weldon and Memphis Minnie used a variety of unusual instruments such as washboard , fiddle , kazoo or mandolin . Memphis Minnie was famous for her virtuoso guitar style. Pianist Memphis Slim began his career in Memphis, but his distinct style was smoother and had some swing elements. Many blues musicians based in Memphis moved to Chicago in the late 1930s or early 1940s and became part of the urban blues movement. [79] [80] Bessie Smith , an early blues singer, known for her powerful voice Urban blues[ edit ] City or urban blues styles were more codified and elaborate, as a performer was no longer within their local, immediate community, and had to adapt to a larger, more varied audience's aesthetic. [81] Classic female urban and vaudeville blues singers were popular in the 1920s, among them "the big three"— Gertrude "Ma" Rainey , Bessie Smith , and Lucille Bogan . Mamie Smith , more a vaudeville performer than a blues artist, was the first African American to record a blues song, in 1920; her second record, "Crazy Blues", sold 75,000 copies in its first month. [82] Ma Rainey, the "Mother of Blues", and Bessie Smith each "[sang] around center tones, perhaps in order to project her voice more easily to the back of a room". Smith would "sing a song in an unusual key, and her artistry in bending and stretching notes with her beautiful, powerful contralto to accommodate her own interpretation was unsurpassed". [83] In 1920, the vaudeville singer Lucille Hegamin became the second black woman to record blues when she recorded "The Jazz Me Blues", [84] and Victoria Spivey , sometimes called Queen Victoria or Za Zu Girl, had a recording career that began in 1926 and spanned forty years. These recordings were typically labeled " race records " to distinguish them from records sold to white audiences. Nonetheless, the recordings of some of the classic female blues singers were purchased by white buyers as well. [85] These blueswomen's contributions to the genre included "increased improvisation on melodic lines, unusual phrasing which altered the emphasis and impact of the lyrics, and vocal dramatics using shouts, groans, moans, and wails. The blues women thus effected changes in other types of popular singing that had spin-offs in jazz, Broadway musicals , torch songs of the 1930s and 1940s, gospel , rhythm and blues , and eventually rock and roll ." [86] Urban male performers included popular black musicians of the era, such as Tampa Red , Big Bill Broonzy and Leroy Carr . An important label of this era was the Chicago-based Bluebird Records . Before World War II, Tampa Red was sometimes referred to as "the Guitar Wizard". Carr accompanied himself on the piano with Scrapper Blackwell on guitar, a format that continued well into the 1950s with artists such as Charles Brown and even Nat "King" Cole . [75] A typical boogie-woogie bass line Play ⓘ Boogie-woogie was another important style of 1930s and early 1940s urban blues. While the style is often associated with solo piano, boogie-woogie was also used to accompany singers and, as a solo part, in bands and small combos. Boogie-woogie style was characterized by a regular bass figure, an ostinato or riff and shifts of level in the left hand, elaborating each chord and trills and decorations in the right hand. Boogie-woogie was pioneered by the Chicago-based Jimmy Yancey and the Boogie-Woogie Trio ( Albert Ammons , Pete Johnson and Meade Lux Lewis ). [87] Chicago boogie-woogie performers included Clarence "Pine Top" Smith and Earl Hines , who "linked the propulsive left-hand rhythms of the ragtime pianists with melodic figures similar to those of Armstrong's trumpet in the right hand". [81] The smooth Louisiana style of Professor Longhair and, more recently, Dr. John blends classic rhythm and blues with blues styles. Another development in this period was big band blues. The " territory bands " operating out of Kansas City , the Bennie Moten orchestra, Jay McShann , and the Count Basie Orchestra were also concentrating on the blues, with 12-bar blues instrumentals such as Basie's " One O'Clock Jump " and " Jumpin' at the Woodside " and boisterous " blues shouting " by Jimmy Rushing on songs such as "Going to Chicago" and " Sent for You Yesterday ". A well-known big band blues tune is Glenn Miller 's " In the Mood ". In the 1940s, the jump blues style developed. Jump blues grew up from the boogie-woogie wave and was strongly influenced by big band music. It uses saxophone or other brass instruments and the guitar in the rhythm section to create a jazzy, up-tempo sound with declamatory vocals. Jump blues tunes by Louis Jordan and Big Joe Turner , based in Kansas City, Missouri , influenced the development of later styles such as rock and roll and rhythm and blues. [88] Dallas-born T-Bone Walker , who is often associated with the California blues style, [89] performed a successful transition from the early urban blues à la Lonnie Johnson and Leroy Carr to the jump blues style and dominated the blues-jazz scene at Los Angeles during the 1940s. [90] 1950s[ edit ] The transition from country blues to urban blues that began in the 1920s was driven by the successive waves of economic crisis and booms that led many rural blacks to move to urban areas, in a movement known as the Great Migration . The long boom following World War II induced another massive migration of the African-American population, the Second Great Migration , which was accompanied by a significant increase of the real income of the urban blacks. The new migrants constituted a new market for the music industry. The term race record , initially used by the music industry for African-American music, was replaced by the term rhythm and blues . This rapidly evolving market was mirrored by Billboard magazine's Rhythm & Blues chart . This marketing strategy reinforced trends in urban blues music such as the use of electric instruments and amplification and the generalization of the blues beat, the blues shuffle , which became ubiquitous in rhythm and blues (R&B). This commercial stream had important consequences for blues music, which, together with jazz and gospel music , became a component of R&B. [91] John Lee Hooker After World War II, new styles of electric blues became popular in cities such as Chicago , [92] Memphis , [93] Detroit [94] [95] and St. Louis . Electric blues used electric guitars , double bass (gradually replaced by bass guitar ), drums , and harmonica (or "blues harp") played through a microphone and a PA system or an overdriven guitar amplifier . Chicago became a center for electric blues from 1948 on, when Muddy Waters recorded his first success, "I Can't Be Satisfied". [96] Chicago blues is influenced to a large extent by Delta blues , because many performers had migrated from the Mississippi region. Howlin' Wolf , Muddy Waters, Willie Dixon and Jimmy Reed were all born in Mississippi and moved to Chicago during the Great Migration. Their style is characterized by the use of electric guitar, sometimes slide guitar, harmonica, and a rhythm section of bass and drums. [97] The saxophonist J. T. Brown played in bands led by Elmore James and by J. B. Lenoir , but the saxophone was used as a backing instrument for rhythmic support more than as a lead instrument. Little Walter , Sonny Boy Williamson (Rice Miller) and Sonny Terry are well known harmonica (called " harp " by blues musicians) players of the early Chicago blues scene. Other harp players such as Big Walter Horton were also influential. Muddy Waters and Elmore James were known for their innovative use of slide electric guitar. Howlin' Wolf and Muddy Waters were known for their deep, "gravelly" voices. The bassist and prolific songwriter and composer Willie Dixon played a major role on the Chicago blues scene. He composed and wrote many standard blues songs of the period, such as " Hoochie Coochie Man ", " I Just Want to Make Love to You " (both penned for Muddy Waters) and, " Wang Dang Doodle " and " Back Door Man " for Howlin' Wolf. Most artists of the Chicago blues style recorded for the Chicago-based Chess Records and Checker Records labels. Smaller blues labels of this era included Vee-Jay Records and J.O.B. Records . During the early 1950s, the dominating Chicago labels were challenged by Sam Phillips ' Sun Records company in Memphis, which recorded B. B. King and Howlin' Wolf before he moved to Chicago in 1960. [98] After Phillips discovered Elvis Presley in 1954, the Sun label turned to the rapidly expanding white audience and started recording mostly rock 'n' roll . [99] In the 1950s, blues had a huge influence on mainstream American popular music . While popular musicians like Bo Diddley [94] and Chuck Berry , [100] both recording for Chess, were influenced by the Chicago blues, their enthusiastic playing styles departed from the melancholy aspects of blues. Chicago blues also influenced Louisiana 's zydeco music, [101] with Clifton Chenier [102] using blues accents. Zydeco musicians used electric solo guitar and cajun arrangements of blues standards. In England, electric blues took root there during a much acclaimed Muddy Waters tour in 1958. Waters, unsuspecting of his audience's tendency towards skiffle , an acoustic, softer brand of blues, turned up his amp and started to play his Chicago brand of electric blues. Although the audience was largely jolted by the performance, the performance influenced local musicians such as Alexis Korner and Cyril Davies to emulate this louder style, inspiring the British Invasion of the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds . [103] In the late 1950s, a new blues style emerged on Chicago's West Side pioneered by Magic Sam , Buddy Guy and Otis Rush on Cobra Records . [104] The "West Side sound" had strong rhythmic support from a rhythm guitar, bass guitar and drums and as perfected by Guy, Freddie King , Magic Slim and Luther Allison was dominated by amplified electric lead guitar. [105] [106] Expressive guitar solos were a key feature of this music. Other blues artists, such as John Lee Hooker , had influences not directly related to the Chicago style. John Lee Hooker's blues is more "personal", based on Hooker's deep rough voice accompanied by a single electric guitar. Though not directly influenced by boogie-woogie, his "groovy" style is sometimes called "guitar boogie". His first hit, " Boogie Chillen ", reached number 1 on the R&B charts in 1949. [107] By the late 1950s, the swamp blues genre developed near Baton Rouge , with performers such as Lightnin' Slim , [108] Slim Harpo , [109] Sam Myers and Jerry McCain around the producer J. D. "Jay" Miller and the Excello label. Strongly influenced by Jimmy Reed , swamp blues has a slower pace and a simpler use of the harmonica than the Chicago blues style performers such as Little Walter or Muddy Waters. Songs from this genre include "Scratch my Back", "She's Tough" and " I'm a King Bee ". Alan Lomax 's recordings of Mississippi Fred McDowell would eventually bring him wider attention on both the blues and folk circuit, with McDowell's droning style influencing North Mississippi hill country blues musicians. [110] 1960s and 1970s[ edit ] Blues legend B.B. King with his guitar, " Lucille " By the beginning of the 1960s, genres influenced by African American music such as rock and roll and soul were part of mainstream popular music. White performers such as the Rolling Stones and the Beatles had brought African-American music to new audiences,  within the U.S. and abroad. However, the blues wave that brought artists such as Muddy Waters to the foreground had stopped. Bluesmen such as Big Bill Broonzy and Willie Dixon started looking for new markets in Europe. Dick Waterman and the blues festivals he organized in Europe played a major role in propagating blues music abroad. In the UK, bands emulated U.S. blues legends, and UK blues rock-based bands had an influential role throughout the 1960s. [111] Blues performers such as John Lee Hooker and Muddy Waters continued to perform to enthusiastic audiences, inspiring new artists steeped in traditional blues, such as New York–born Taj Mahal . John Lee Hooker blended his blues style with rock elements and playing with younger white musicians, creating a musical style that can be heard on the 1971 album Endless Boogie . B. B. King 's singing and virtuoso guitar technique earned him the eponymous title "king of the blues". King introduced a sophisticated style of guitar soloing based on fluid string bending and shimmering vibrato that influenced many later electric blues guitarists. [112] In contrast to the Chicago style, King's band used strong brass support from a saxophone, trumpet, and trombone, instead of using slide guitar or harp. Tennessee -born Bobby "Blue" Bland , like B. B. King, also straddled the blues and R&B genres. During this period, Freddie King and Albert King often played with rock and soul musicians ( Eric Clapton and Booker T & the MGs ) and had a major influence on those styles of music. The music of the civil rights movement [113] and Free Speech Movement in the U.S. prompted a resurgence of interest in American roots music and early African American music . As well festivals such as the Newport Folk Festival [114] brought traditional blues to a new audience, which helped to revive interest in prewar acoustic blues and performers such as Son House , Mississippi John Hurt , Skip James , and Reverend Gary Davis . [113] Many compilations of classic prewar blues were republished by the Yazoo Records . J. B. Lenoir from the Chicago blues movement in the 1950s recorded several LPs using acoustic guitar, sometimes accompanied by Willie Dixon on the acoustic bass or drums. His songs, originally distributed only in Europe, [115] commented on political issues such as racism or Vietnam War issues, which was unusual for this period. His album Alabama Blues contained a song with the following lyric: I never will go back to Alabama, that is not the place for me, I never will go back to Alabama, that is not the place for me. You know they killed my sister and my brother and the whole world let them peoples go down there free White audiences' interest in the blues during the 1960s increased due to the Chicago-based Paul Butterfield Blues Band featuring guitarist Michael Bloomfield and singer/songwriter Nick Gravenites , and the British blues movement. The style of British blues developed in the UK, when musicians such as Cyril Davies , Alexis Korner 's Blues Incorporated, Fleetwood Mac , John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers , the Rolling Stones , Animals , the Yardbirds , Aynsley Dunbar Retaliation, [116] Chicken Shack , [117] early Jethro Tull , Cream and the Irish musician Rory Gallagher performed classic blues songs from the Delta or Chicago blues traditions. In 1963, Amiri Baraka , then known as LeRoi Jones, was the first to write a book on the social history of the blues in Blues People: The Negro Music in White America. The British and blues musicians of the early 1960s inspired a number of American blues rock performers, including Canned Heat , Janis Joplin , Johnny Winter , the J. Geils Band , Ry Cooder , and the Allman Brothers Band . One blues rock performer, Jimi Hendrix , was a rarity in his field at the time: a Black man who played psychedelic rock . Hendrix was a skilled guitarist, and a pioneer in the innovative use of distortion and audio feedback in his music. [118] Through these artists and others, blues music influenced the development of rock music .  Later in the 1960s, British singer Jo Ann Kelly started her recording career.  In the US, from the 1970s, female singers Bonnie Raitt and Phoebe Snow performed blues. [119] In the early 1970s, the Texas rock-blues style emerged, which used guitars in both solo and rhythm roles. In contrast with the West Side blues, the Texas style is strongly influenced by the British rock-blues movement. Major artists of the Texas style are Johnny Winter , Stevie Ray Vaughan , the Fabulous Thunderbirds (led by harmonica player and singer-songwriter Kim Wilson ), and ZZ Top . These artists all began their musical careers in the 1970s but they did not achieve international success until the next decade. [120] 1980s to the present[ edit ] Italian singer Zucchero is credited as the "Father of Italian Blues", and is among the few European blues artists who still enjoy international success. [121] Since the 1980s there has been a resurgence of interest in the blues among a certain part of the African-American population, particularly around Jackson, Mississippi and other deep South regions. Often termed " soul blues " or " Southern soul ", the music at the heart of this movement was given new life by the unexpected success of two particular recordings on the Jackson-based Malaco label: [122] Z. Z. Hill 's Down Home Blues (1982) and Little Milton 's The Blues is Alright (1984). Contemporary African-American performers who work in this style of the blues include Bobby Rush , Denise LaSalle , Sir Charles Jones , Bettye LaVette , Marvin Sease , Peggy Scott-Adams , Mel Waiters, Clarence Carter , Dr. "Feelgood" Potts, O.B. Buchana, Ms. Jody, Shirley Brown , and dozens of others. Eric Clapton performing at Hyde Park, London, in June 2008 During the 1980s blues also continued in both traditional and new forms. In 1986 the album Strong Persuader announced Robert Cray as a major blues artist. The first Stevie Ray Vaughan recording Texas Flood was released in 1983, and the Texas-based guitarist exploded onto the international stage. John Lee Hooker 's popularity was revived with the album The Healer in 1989. Eric Clapton , known for his performances with the Blues Breakers and Cream , made a comeback in the 1990s with his album Unplugged , in which he played some standard blues numbers on acoustic guitar. However, beginning in the 1990s, digital multitrack recording and other technological advances and new marketing strategies including video clip production increased costs, challenging the spontaneity and improvisation that are an important component of blues music. [123] In the 1980s and 1990s, blues publications such as Living Blues and Blues Revue were launched, major cities began forming blues societies, outdoor blues festivals became more common, and [124] more nightclubs and venues for blues emerged. [125] Tedeschi Trucks Band and Gov't Mule released blues rock albums. Female blues singers such as Bonnie Raitt, Susan Tedeschi , Sue Foley and Shannon Curfman also recorded albums. Musical impact[ edit ] Blues musical styles, forms (12-bar blues), melodies, and the blues scale have influenced many other genres of music, such as rock and roll, jazz, and popular music. [128] Prominent jazz, folk or rock performers, such as Louis Armstrong , Duke Ellington , Miles Davis , and Bob Dylan have performed significant blues recordings. The blues scale is often used in popular songs like Harold Arlen 's "Blues in the Night", blues ballads like "Since I Fell for You" and "Please Send Me Someone to Love", and even in orchestral works such as George Gershwin 's " Rhapsody in Blue " and "Concerto in F". Gershwin's second "Prelude" for solo piano is an interesting example of a classical blues, maintaining the form with academic strictness. The blues scale is ubiquitous in modern popular music and informs many modal frames , especially the ladder of thirds used in rock music (for example, in " A Hard Day's Night "). Blues forms are used in the theme to the televised Batman , teen idol Fabian Forte 's hit, "Turn Me Loose", country music star Jimmie Rodgers ' music, and guitarist/vocalist Tracy Chapman 's hit "Give Me One Reason". "Blues singing is about emotion. Its influence on popular singing has been so widespread that, at least among males, singing and emoting have become almost identical—it is a matter of projection rather than hitting the notes." [129] — Robert Christgau , 1972 Early country bluesmen such as Skip James , Charley Patton , Georgia Tom Dorsey played country and urban blues and had influences from spiritual singing. Dorsey helped to popularize Gospel music . [130] Gospel music developed in the 1930s, with the Golden Gate Quartet . In the 1950s, soul music by Sam Cooke , Ray Charles and James Brown used gospel and blues music elements. In the 1960s and 1970s, gospel and blues were merged in soul blues music. Funk music of the 1970s was influenced by soul; funk can be seen as an antecedent of hip-hop and contemporary R&B. R&B music can be traced back to spirituals and blues. Musically, spirituals were a descendant of New England choral traditions, and in particular of Isaac Watts 's hymns , mixed with African rhythms and call-and-response forms. Spirituals or religious chants in the African-American community are much better documented than the "low-down" blues. Spiritual singing developed because African-American communities could gather for mass or worship gatherings, which were called camp meetings . Edward P. Comentale has noted how the blues was often used as a medium for art or self-expression, stating: "As heard from Delta shacks to Chicago tenements to Harlem cabarets, the blues proved—despite its pained origins—a remarkably flexible medium and a new arena for the shaping of identity and community." [131] Duke Ellington straddled the big band and bebop genres. Ellington extensively used the blues form. [132] Before World War II , the boundaries between blues and jazz were less clear. Usually, jazz had harmonic structures stemming from brass bands , whereas blues had blues forms such as the 12-bar blues. However, the jump blues of the 1940s mixed both styles. After WWII, blues had a substantial influence on jazz. Bebop classics, such as Charlie Parker 's "Now's the Time", used the blues form with the pentatonic scale and blue notes. Bebop marked a major shift in the role of jazz, from a popular style of music for dancing to a "high-art", less-accessible, cerebral "musician's music". The audience for both blues and jazz split, and the border between blues and jazz became more defined. [132] [133] The blues' 12-bar structure and the blues scale was a major influence on rock and roll music. Rock and roll has been called "blues with a backbeat "; Carl Perkins called rockabilly "blues with a country beat". Rockabillies were also said to be 12-bar blues played with a bluegrass beat. " Hound Dog ", with its unmodified 12-bar structure (in both harmony and lyrics) and a melody centered on flatted third of the tonic (and flatted seventh of the subdominant), is a blues song transformed into a rock and roll song. Jerry Lee Lewis 's style of rock and roll was heavily influenced by the blues and its derivative boogie-woogie. His style of music was not exactly rockabilly but it has been often called real rock and roll (this is a label he shares with several African American rock and roll performers). [134] [135] Many early rock and roll songs are based on blues: " That's All Right Mama ", " Johnny B. Goode ", " Blue Suede Shoes ", " Whole Lotta Shakin' Goin On ", " Shake, Rattle, and Roll ", and " Long Tall Sally ". The early African American rock musicians retained the sexual themes and innuendos of blues music: "Got a gal named Sue, knows just what to do" (" Tutti Frutti ", Little Richard ) or "See the girl with the red dress on, She can do the Birdland all night long" (" What'd I Say ", Ray Charles ). The 12-bar blues structure can be found even in novelty pop songs, such as Bob Dylan 's " Obviously Five Believers " and Esther and Abi Ofarim 's " Cinderella Rockefella ". Early country music was infused with the blues. [136] Jimmie Rodgers , Moon Mullican , Bob Wills , Bill Monroe and Hank Williams have all described themselves as blues singers and their music has a blues feel that is different, at first glance at least, from the later country-pop of artists like Eddy Arnold . Yet, if one looks back further, Arnold also started out singing bluesy songs like 'I'll Hold You in My Heart'. A lot of the 1970s-era "outlaw" country music by Willie Nelson and Waylon Jennings also borrowed from the blues. When Jerry Lee Lewis returned to country music after the decline of 1950s style rock and roll, he sang with a blues feel and often included blues standards on his albums. In popular culture[ edit ] The music of Taj Mahal for the 1972 movie Sounder marked a revival of interest in acoustic blues. Like many other genres, blues has been called the " devil 's music" or "music of the devil", even of inciting violence and other poor behavior. [137] In the early 20th century, the blues was considered disreputable, especially as white audiences began listening to the blues during the 1920s. [72] The close association with the devil was actually a well known characteristic of blues lyrics and culture between the 1920s and 1960s. The devil's connection to the blues has faded from popular memory since then for a number of reasons, other than in the narrow sense of Robert Johnson selling his soul to the devil at the crossroads. A study of the devil's role in the blues was published in 2017 called Beyond the Crossroads: The Devil & The Blues Tradition. [138] During the blues revival of the 1960s and 1970s, acoustic blues artist Taj Mahal and Texas bluesman Lightnin' Hopkins wrote and performed music that figured prominently in the critically acclaimed film Sounder (1972). The film earned Mahal a Grammy nomination for Best Original Score Written for a Motion Picture and a BAFTA nomination. [139] Almost 30 years later, Mahal wrote blues for, and performed a banjo composition, claw-hammer style, in the 2001 movie release Songcatcher , which focused on the story of the preservation of the roots music of Appalachia . Perhaps the most visible example of the blues style of music in the late 20th century came in 1980, when Dan Aykroyd and John Belushi released the film The Blues Brothers . The film drew many of the biggest living influencers of the rhythm and blues genre together, such as Ray Charles , James Brown , Cab Calloway , Aretha Franklin , and John Lee Hooker . The band formed also began a successful tour under the Blues Brothers marquee. 1998 brought a sequel, Blues Brothers 2000 that, while not holding as great a critical and financial success, featured a much larger number of blues artists, such as B.B. King , Bo Diddley , Erykah Badu , Eric Clapton , Steve Winwood , Charlie Musselwhite , Blues Traveler , Jimmie Vaughan , and Jeff Baxter . In 2003, Martin Scorsese made significant efforts to promote the blues to a larger audience. He asked several famous directors such as Clint Eastwood and Wim Wenders to participate in a series of documentary films for PBS called The Blues . [140] He also participated in the rendition of compilations of major blues artists in a series of high-quality CDs. Blues guitarist and vocalist Keb' Mo' performed his blues rendition of " America, the Beautiful " in 2006 to close out the final season of the television series The West Wing .
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Music genre that uses electronic instruments For other uses, see Electronic music (disambiguation) . "Electronic musician" redirects here. For the magazine, see Electronic Musician . Electronic music Early 20th century, United States and Europe Derivative forms e Electronic music broadly is a group of music genres that employ electronic musical instruments , circuitry-based music technology and software, or general-purpose electronics (such as personal computers ) in its creation. It includes both music made using electronic and electromechanical means ( electroacoustic music ). Pure electronic instruments depended entirely on circuitry-based sound generation, for instance using devices such as an electronic oscillator , theremin , or synthesizer . Electromechanical instruments can have mechanical parts such as strings, hammers, and electric elements including magnetic pickups , power amplifiers and loudspeakers . Such electromechanical devices include the telharmonium , Hammond organ , electric piano and electric guitar . [3] [4] The first electronic musical devices were developed at the end of the 19th century. During the 1920s and 1930s, some electronic instruments were introduced and the first compositions featuring them were written. By the 1940s, magnetic audio tape allowed musicians to tape sounds and then modify them by changing the tape speed or direction, leading to the development of electroacoustic tape music in the 1940s, in Egypt and France. Musique concrète , created in Paris in 1948, was based on editing together recorded fragments of natural and industrial sounds. Music produced solely from electronic generators was first produced in Germany in 1953 by Karlheinz Stockhausen . Electronic music was also created in Japan and the United States beginning in the 1950s and Algorithmic composition with computers was first demonstrated in the same decade. During the 1960s, digital computer music was pioneered, innovation in live electronics took place, and Japanese electronic musical instruments began to influence the music industry . In the early 1970s, Moog synthesizers and drum machines helped popularize synthesized electronic music. The 1970s also saw electronic music begin to have a significant influence on popular music , with the adoption of polyphonic synthesizers , electronic drums , drum machines, and turntables , through the emergence of genres such as disco , krautrock , new wave , synth-pop , hip hop , and EDM . In the early 1980s mass-produced digital synthesizers , such as the Yamaha DX7 , became popular, and MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface) was developed. In the same decade, with a greater reliance on synthesizers and the adoption of programmable drum machines, electronic popular music came to the fore. During the 1990s, with the proliferation of increasingly affordable music technology, electronic music production became an established part of popular culture. [5] In Berlin starting in 1989, the Love Parade became the largest street party with over 1 million visitors, inspiring other such popular celebrations of electronic music. [6] Contemporary electronic music includes many varieties and ranges from experimental art music to popular forms such as electronic dance music . Pop electronic music is most recognizable in its 4/4 form and more connected with the mainstream than preceding forms which were popular in niche markets. [7] Origins: late 19th century to early 20th century[ edit ] Front page of Scientific American in 1907, demonstrating the size, operation, and popularity of the Telharmonium At the turn of the 20th century, experimentation with emerging electronics led to the first electronic musical instruments . [8] These initial inventions were not sold, but were instead used in demonstrations and public performances. The audiences were presented with reproductions of existing music instead of new compositions for the instruments. [9] While some were considered novelties and produced simple tones, the Telharmonium synthesized the sound of several orchestral instruments with reasonable precision. It achieved viable public interest and made commercial progress into streaming music through telephone networks . [10] Critics of musical conventions at the time saw promise in these developments. Ferruccio Busoni encouraged the composition of microtonal music allowed for by electronic instruments. He predicted the use of machines in future music, writing the influential Sketch of a New Esthetic of Music (1907). [11] [12] Futurists such as Francesco Balilla Pratella and Luigi Russolo began composing music with acoustic noise to evoke the sound of machinery . They predicted expansions in timbre allowed for by electronics in the influential manifesto The Art of Noises (1913). [13] [14] Early compositions[ edit ] Leon Theremin demonstrating the theremin in 1927 Developments of the vacuum tube led to electronic instruments that were smaller, amplified , and more practical for performance. [15] In particular, the theremin , ondes Martenot and trautonium were commercially produced by the early 1930s. [16] [17] From the late 1920s, the increased practicality of electronic instruments influenced composers such as Joseph Schillinger and Maria Schuppel to adopt them. They were typically used within orchestras, and most composers wrote parts for the theremin that could otherwise be performed with string instruments . [16] Avant-garde composers criticized the predominant use of electronic instruments for conventional purposes. [16] The instruments offered expansions in pitch resources [18] that were exploited by advocates of microtonal music such as Charles Ives , Dimitrios Levidis , Olivier Messiaen and Edgard Varèse . [19] [20] [21] Further, Percy Grainger used the theremin to abandon fixed tonation entirely, [22] while Russian composers such as Gavriil Popov treated it as a source of noise in otherwise-acoustic noise music . [23] Recording experiments[ edit ] Developments in early recording technology paralleled that of electronic instruments. The first means of recording and reproducing audio was invented in the late 19th century with the mechanical phonograph . [24] Record players became a common household item, and by the 1920s composers were using them to play short recordings in performances. [25] The introduction of electrical recording in 1925 was followed by increased experimentation with record players. Paul Hindemith and Ernst Toch composed several pieces in 1930 by layering recordings of instruments and vocals at adjusted speeds. Influenced by these techniques, John Cage composed Imaginary Landscape No. 1 in 1939 by adjusting the speeds of recorded tones. [26] Composers began to experiment with newly developed sound-on-film technology. Recordings could be spliced together to create sound collages , such as those by Tristan Tzara , Kurt Schwitters , Filippo Tommaso Marinetti , Walter Ruttmann and Dziga Vertov . Further, the technology allowed sound to be graphically created and modified . These techniques were used to compose soundtracks for several films in Germany and Russia, in addition to the popular Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde in the United States. Experiments with graphical sound were continued by Norman McLaren from the late 1930s. [27] Development: 1940s to 1950s[ edit ] Electroacoustic tape music[ edit ] Further information: Electroacoustic music and Sound recording and reproduction The first practical audio tape recorder was unveiled in 1935. [28] Improvements to the technology were made using the AC biasing technique, which significantly improved recording fidelity. [29] [30] As early as 1942, test recordings were being made in stereo. [31] Although these developments were initially confined to Germany, recorders and tapes were brought to the United States following the end of World War II. [32] These were the basis for the first commercially produced tape recorder in 1948. [33] In 1944, before the use of magnetic tape for compositional purposes, Egyptian composer Halim El-Dabh , while still a student in Cairo , used a cumbersome wire recorder to record sounds of an ancient zaar ceremony. Using facilities at the Middle East Radio studios El-Dabh processed the recorded material using reverberation, echo, voltage controls and re-recording. What resulted is believed to be the earliest tape music composition. [34] The resulting work was entitled The Expression of Zaar and it was presented in 1944 at an art gallery event in Cairo. While his initial experiments in tape-based composition were not widely known outside of Egypt at the time, El-Dabh is also known for his later work in electronic music at the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center in the late 1950s. [35] See also: Acousmatic music Phonogene (1953), a tape machine for modifying the sound structure, developed by Pierre Schaeffer et al.  at GRMC Pierre Schaeffer presenting the Acousmonium (1974) that consisted of 80 loudspeakers for tape playback, at GRM Following his work with Studio d'Essai at Radiodiffusion Française (RDF), during the early 1940s, Pierre Schaeffer is credited with originating the theory and practice of musique concrète. In the late 1940s, experiments in sound-based composition using shellac record players were first conducted by Schaeffer. In 1950, the techniques of musique concrete were expanded when magnetic tape machines were used to explore sound manipulation practices such as speed variation ( pitch shift ) and tape splicing . [36] [37] On 5 October 1948, RDF broadcast Schaeffer's Etude aux chemins de fer. This was the first " movement " of Cinq études de bruits, and marked the beginning of studio realizations [38] and musique concrète (or acousmatic art). Schaeffer employed a disc cutting lathe , four turntables, a four-channel mixer, filters, an echo chamber, and a mobile recording unit. Not long after this, Pierre Henry began collaborating with Schaeffer, a partnership that would have profound and lasting effects on the direction of electronic music. Another associate of Schaeffer, Edgard Varèse , began work on Déserts , a work for chamber orchestra and tape. The tape parts were created at Pierre Schaeffer's studio and were later revised at Columbia University. In 1950, Schaeffer gave the first public (non-broadcast) concert of musique concrète at the École Normale de Musique de Paris . "Schaeffer used a PA system , several turntables, and mixers. The performance did not go well, as creating live montages with turntables had never been done before." [39] Later that same year, Pierre Henry collaborated with Schaeffer on Symphonie pour un homme seul (1950) the first major work of musique concrete. [40] In Paris in 1951, in what was to become an important worldwide trend, RTF established the first studio for the production of electronic music. Also in 1951, Schaeffer and Henry produced an opera, Orpheus, for concrete sounds and voices. By 1951 the work of Schaeffer, composer-percussionist Pierre Henry, and sound engineer Jacques Poullin had received official recognition and The Groupe de Recherches de Musique Concrète , Club d 'Essai de la Radiodiffusion-Télévision Française was established at RTF in Paris, the ancestor of the ORTF . [41] Elektronische Musik, Germany[ edit ] Karlheinz Stockhausen in the Electronic Music Studio of WDR, Cologne, in 1991 Karlheinz Stockhausen worked briefly in Schaeffer's studio in 1952, and afterward for many years at the WDR Cologne's Studio for Electronic Music . 1954 saw the advent of what would now be considered authentic electric plus acoustic compositions—acoustic instrumentation augmented/accompanied by recordings of manipulated or electronically generated sound. Three major works were premiered that year: Varèse's Déserts, for chamber ensemble and tape sounds, and two works by Otto Luening and Vladimir Ussachevsky : Rhapsodic Variations for the Louisville Symphony and A Poem in Cycles and Bells, both for orchestra and tape. Because he had been working at Schaeffer's studio, the tape part for Varèse's work contains much more concrete sounds than electronic. "A group made up of wind instruments, percussion and piano alternate with the mutated sounds of factory noises and ship sirens and motors, coming from two loudspeakers." [42] At the German premiere of Déserts in Hamburg, which was conducted by Bruno Maderna , the tape controls were operated by Karlheinz Stockhausen. [42] The title Déserts suggested to Varèse not only "all physical deserts (of sand, sea, snow, of outer space, of empty streets), but also the deserts in the mind of man; not only those stripped aspects of nature that suggest bareness, aloofness, timelessness, but also that remote inner space no telescope can reach, where man is alone, a world of mystery and essential loneliness." [43] In Cologne, what would become the most famous electronic music studio in the world, was officially opened at the radio studios of the NWDR in 1953, though it had been in the planning stages as early as 1950 and early compositions were made and broadcast in 1951. [44] The brainchild of Werner Meyer-Eppler , Robert Beyer, and Herbert Eimert (who became its first director), the studio was soon joined by Karlheinz Stockhausen and Gottfried Michael Koenig . In his 1949 thesis Elektronische Klangerzeugung: Elektronische Musik und Synthetische Sprache, Meyer-Eppler conceived the idea to synthesize music entirely from electronically produced signals; in this way, elektronische Musik was sharply differentiated from French musique concrète, which used sounds recorded from acoustical sources. [45] [46] In 1953, Stockhausen composed his Studie I , followed in 1954 by Elektronische Studie II —the first electronic piece to be published as a score. In 1955, more experimental and electronic studios began to appear. Notable were the creation of the Studio di fonologia musicale di Radio Milano , a studio at the NHK in Tokyo founded by Toshiro Mayuzumi , and the Philips studio at Eindhoven , the Netherlands, which moved to the University of Utrecht as the Institute of Sonology in 1960. "With Stockhausen and Mauricio Kagel in residence, [Cologne] became a year-round hive of charismatic avante-gardism." [47] on two occasions combining electronically generated sounds with relatively conventional orchestras—in Mixtur (1964) and Hymnen, dritte Region mit Orchester (1967). [48] Stockhausen stated that his listeners had told him his electronic music gave them an experience of "outer space", sensations of flying, or being in a "fantastic dream world". [49] United States[ edit ] In the United States, electronic music was being created as early as 1939, when John Cage published Imaginary Landscape, No. 1 , using two variable-speed turntables, frequency recordings, muted piano, and cymbal, but no electronic means of production. Cage composed five more "Imaginary Landscapes" between 1942 and 1952 (one withdrawn), mostly for percussion ensemble, though No. 4 is for twelve radios and No. 5, written in 1952, uses 42 recordings and is to be realized as a magnetic tape. According to Otto Luening, Cage also performed Williams Mix at Donaueschingen in 1954, using eight loudspeakers, three years after his alleged collaboration.[ clarification needed ] Williams Mix was a success at the Donaueschingen Festival , where it made a "strong impression". [50] The Music for Magnetic Tape Project was formed by members of the New York School ( John Cage , Earle Brown , Christian Wolff , David Tudor , and Morton Feldman ), [51] and lasted three years until 1954. Cage wrote of this collaboration: "In this social darkness, therefore, the work of Earle Brown, Morton Feldman, and Christian Wolff continues to present a brilliant light, for the reason that at the several points of notation, performance, and audition, action is provocative." [52] Cage completed Williams Mix in 1953 while working with the Music for Magnetic Tape Project. [53] The group had no permanent facility, and had to rely on borrowed time in commercial sound studios, including the studio of Bebe and Louis Barron . See also: Vladimir Ussachevsky and RCA Mark II Sound Synthesizer In the same year Columbia University purchased its first tape recorder—a professional Ampex machine—to record concerts. Vladimir Ussachevsky, who was on the music faculty of Columbia University, was placed in charge of the device, and almost immediately began experimenting with it. Herbert Russcol writes: "Soon he was intrigued with the new sonorities he could achieve by recording musical instruments and then superimposing them on one another." [54] Ussachevsky said later: "I suddenly realized that the tape recorder could be treated as an instrument of sound transformation." [54] On Thursday, 8 May 1952, Ussachevsky presented several demonstrations of tape music/effects that he created at his Composers Forum, in the McMillin Theatre at Columbia University. These included Transposition, Reverberation, Experiment, Composition, and Underwater Valse. In an interview, he stated: "I presented a few examples of my discovery in a public concert in New York together with other compositions I had written for conventional instruments." [54] Otto Luening, who had attended this concert, remarked: "The equipment at his disposal consisted of an Ampex tape recorder . . . and a simple box-like device designed by the brilliant young engineer, Peter Mauzey, to create feedback, a form of mechanical reverberation. Other equipment was borrowed or purchased with personal funds." [55] Just three months later, in August 1952, Ussachevsky traveled to Bennington, Vermont, at Luening's invitation to present his experiments. There, the two collaborated on various pieces. Luening described the event: "Equipped with earphones and a flute, I began developing my first tape-recorder composition. Both of us were fluent improvisors and the medium fired our imaginations." [55] They played some early pieces informally at a party, where "a number of composers almost solemnly congratulated us saying, 'This is it' ('it' meaning the music of the future)." [55] Word quickly reached New York City. Oliver Daniel telephoned and invited the pair to "produce a group of short compositions for the October concert sponsored by the American Composers Alliance and Broadcast Music, Inc., under the direction of Leopold Stokowski at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. After some hesitation, we agreed. . . . Henry Cowell placed his home and studio in Woodstock, New York, at our disposal. With the borrowed equipment in the back of Ussachevsky's car, we left Bennington for Woodstock and stayed two weeks. . . . In late September 1952, the travelling laboratory reached Ussachevsky's living room in New York, where we eventually completed the compositions." [55] Two months later, on 28 October, Vladimir Ussachevsky and Otto Luening presented the first Tape Music concert in the United States. The concert included Luening's Fantasy in Space (1952)—"an impressionistic virtuoso piece" [55] using manipulated recordings of flute—and Low Speed (1952), an "exotic composition that took the flute far below its natural range." [55] Both pieces were created at the home of Henry Cowell in Woodstock, New York. After several concerts caused a sensation in New York City, Ussachevsky and Luening were invited onto a live broadcast of NBC's Today Show to do an interview demonstration—the first televised electroacoustic performance. Luening described the event: "I improvised some [flute] sequences for the tape recorder. Ussachevsky then and there put them through electronic transformations." [56] The score for Forbidden Planet , by Louis and Bebe Barron , [57] was entirely composed using custom-built electronic circuits and tape recorders in 1956 (but no synthesizers in the modern sense of the word).[ clarification needed ] ANS synthesizer exhibited at Glinka Museum In 1929, Nikolai Obukhov invented the "sounding cross" (la croix sonore), comparable to the principle of the theremin . [58] In the 1930s, Nikolai Ananyev invented "sonar", and engineer Alexander Gurov — neoviolena, I. Ilsarov — ilston., [59] A. Rimsky-Korsakov [ ru ] and A. Ivanov — emiriton [ ru ]. [58] Composer and inventor Arseny Avraamov was engaged in scientific work on sound synthesis and conducted a number of experiments that would later form the basis of Soviet electro-musical instruments. [60] In 1956 Vyacheslav Mescherin created the Ensemble of electro-musical instruments [ ru ], which used theremins, electric harps, electric organs, the first synthesizer in the USSR "Ekvodin", [58] and also created the first Soviet reverb machine. The style in which Meshcherin's ensemble played is known as " Space age pop ". [60] In 1957, engineer Igor Simonov assembled a working model of a noise recorder (electroeoliphone), with the help of which it was possible to extract various timbres and consonances of a noise nature. [58] In 1958, Evgeny Murzin designed ANS synthesizer , one of the world's first polyphonic musical synthesizers. Founded by Murzin in 1966, the Moscow Experimental Electronic Music Studio became the base for a new generation of experimenters – Eduard Artemyev , Alexander Nemtin [ ru ], Sándor Kallós , Sofia Gubaidulina , Alfred Schnittke , and Vladimir Martynov . [58] [60] By the end of the 1960s, musical groups playing light electronic music appeared in the USSR. At the state level, this music began to be used to attract foreign tourists to the country and for broadcasting to foreign countries. [61] In the mid-1970s, composer Alexander Zatsepin designed an "orchestrolla" – a modification of the mellotron. [62] Australia[ edit ] CSIRAC, Australia's first digital computer, displayed at the Melbourne Museum The world's first computer to play music was CSIRAC , which was designed and built by Trevor Pearcey and Maston Beard. Mathematician Geoff Hill programmed the CSIRAC to play popular musical melodies from the very early 1950s. In 1951 it publicly played the Colonel Bogey March , of which no known recordings exist, only the accurate reconstruction. [63] However, CSIRAC played standard repertoire and was not used to extend musical thinking or composition practice. CSIRAC was never recorded, but the music played was accurately reconstructed. The oldest known recordings of computer-generated music were played by the Ferranti Mark 1 computer, a commercial version of the Baby Machine from the University of Manchester in the autumn of 1951. [64] The music program was written by Christopher Strachey . Yamaha Magna Organ and the designated tone cabinet (1935) [65] The earliest group of electronic musical instruments in Japan, Yamaha Magna Organ was built in 1935. [65] however, after World War II, Japanese composers such as Minao Shibata knew of the development of electronic musical instruments. By the late 1940s, Japanese composers began experimenting with electronic music and institutional sponsorship enabled them to experiment with advanced equipment. Their infusion of Asian music into the emerging genre would eventually support Japan's popularity in the development of music technology several decades later. [66] Following the foundation of electronics company Sony in 1946, composers Toru Takemitsu and Minao Shibata independently explored possible uses for electronic technology to produce music. [67] Takemitsu had ideas similar to musique concrète , which he was unaware of, while Shibata foresaw the development of synthesizers and predicted a drastic change in music. [68] Sony began producing popular magnetic tape recorders for government and public use. [66] [69] The avant-garde collective Jikken Kōbō (Experimental Workshop), founded in 1950, was offered access to emerging audio technology by Sony. The company hired Toru Takemitsu to demonstrate their tape recorders with compositions and performances of electronic tape music. [70] The first electronic tape pieces by the group were "Toraware no Onna" ("Imprisoned Woman") and "Piece B", composed in 1951 by Kuniharu Akiyama. [71] Many of the electroacoustic tape pieces they produced were used as incidental music for radio, film, and theatre. They also held concerts employing a slide show synchronized with a recorded soundtrack. [72] Composers outside of the Jikken Kōbō, such as Yasushi Akutagawa , Saburo Tominaga, and Shirō Fukai , were also experimenting with radiophonic tape music between 1952 and 1953. [69] Musique concrète was introduced to Japan by Toshiro Mayuzumi , who was influenced by a Pierre Schaeffer concert. From 1952, he composed tape music pieces for a comedy film, a radio broadcast, and a radio drama. [71] [73] However, Schaeffer's concept of sound object was not influential among Japanese composers, who were mainly interested in overcoming the restrictions of human performance. [74] This led to several Japanese electroacoustic musicians making use of serialism and twelve-tone techniques , [74] evident in Yoshirō Irino 's 1951 dodecaphonic piece "Concerto da Camera", [73] in the organization of electronic sounds in Mayuzumi's "X, Y, Z for Musique Concrète", and later in Shibata's electronic music by 1956. [75] Modelling the NWDR studio in Cologne, established an NHK electronic music studio  in Tokyo in 1954, which became one of the world's leading electronic music facilities.The NHK electronic music studio  was equipped with technologies such as tone-generating and audio processing equipment, recording and radiophonic equipment, ondes Martenot, Monochord and Melochord , sine-wave oscillators , tape recorders, ring modulators , band-pass filters , and four- and eight-channel mixers . Musicians associated with the studio included Toshiro Mayuzumi, Minao Shibata, Joji Yuasa, Toshi Ichiyanagi , and Toru Takemitsu. The studio's first electronic compositions were completed in 1955, including Mayuzumi's five-minute pieces "Studie I: Music for Sine Wave by Proportion of Prime Number", "Music for Modulated Wave by Proportion of Prime Number" and "Invention for Square Wave and Sawtooth Wave" produced using the studio's various tone-generating capabilities, and Shibata's 20-minute stereo piece "Musique Concrète for Stereophonic Broadcast". [76] [77] Mid-to-late 1950s[ edit ] The impact of computers continued in 1956. Lejaren Hiller and Leonard Isaacson composed Illiac Suite for string quartet , the first complete work of computer-assisted composition using algorithmic composition. "... Hiller postulated that a computer could be taught the rules of a particular style and then called on to compose accordingly." [78] Later developments included the work of Max Mathews at Bell Laboratories , who developed the influential MUSIC I program in 1957, one of the first computer programs to play electronic music. Vocoder technology was also a major development in this early era. In 1956, Stockhausen composed Gesang der Jünglinge , the first major work of the Cologne studio, based on a text from the Book of Daniel . An important technological development of that year was the invention of the Clavivox synthesizer by Raymond Scott with subassembly by Robert Moog . In 1957, Kid Baltan ( Dick Raaymakers ) and Tom Dissevelt released their debut album, Song Of The Second Moon, recorded at the Philips studio in the Netherlands. [79] The public remained interested in the new sounds being created around the world, as can be deduced by the inclusion of Varèse's Poème électronique , which was played over four hundred loudspeakers at the Philips Pavilion of the 1958 Brussels World Fair . That same year, Mauricio Kagel , an Argentine composer, composed Transición II. The work was realized at the WDR studio in Cologne. Two musicians performed on the piano, one in the traditional manner, the other playing on the strings, frame, and case. Two other performers used tape to unite the presentation of live sounds with the future of prerecorded materials from later on and its past of recordings made earlier in the performance. RCA Mark II Sound Synthesizer In 1958, Columbia-Princeton developed the RCA Mark II Sound Synthesizer , the first programmable synthesizer. [80] Prominent composers such as Vladimir Ussachevsky, Otto Luening, Milton Babbitt , Charles Wuorinen , Halim El-Dabh, Bülent Arel and Mario Davidovsky used the RCA Synthesizer extensively in various compositions. [81] One of the most influential composers associated with the early years of the studio was Egypt's Halim El-Dabh who, [82] after having developed the earliest known electronic tape music in 1944, [34] became more famous for Leiyla and the Poet, a 1959 series of electronic compositions that stood out for its immersion and seamless fusion of electronic and folk music , in contrast to the more mathematical approach used by serial composers of the time such as Babbitt. El-Dabh's Leiyla and the Poet, released as part of the album Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center in 1961, would be cited as a strong influence by a number of musicians, ranging from Neil Rolnick , Charles Amirkhanian and Alice Shields to rock musicians Frank Zappa and The West Coast Pop Art Experimental Band . [83] Following the emergence of differences within the GRMC (Groupe de Recherche de Musique Concrète) Pierre Henry, Philippe Arthuys, and several of their colleagues, resigned in April 1958. Schaeffer created a new collective, called Groupe de Recherches Musicales (GRM) and set about recruiting new members including Luc Ferrari , Beatriz Ferreyra , François-Bernard Mâche , Iannis Xenakis , Bernard Parmegiani , and Mireille Chamass-Kyrou. Later arrivals included Ivo Malec , Philippe Carson, Romuald Vandelle, Edgardo Canton and François Bayle . [84] See also: Synthesizer , Harald Bode , Modular synthesizer , Buchla , and Moog Music These were fertile years for electronic music—not just for academia, but for independent artists as synthesizer technology became more accessible. By this time, a strong community of composers and musicians working with new sounds and instruments was established and growing. 1960 witnessed the composition of Luening's Gargoyles for violin and tape as well as the premiere of Stockhausen's Kontakte for electronic sounds, piano, and percussion. This piece existed in two versions—one for 4-channel tape, and the other for tape with human performers. "In Kontakte, Stockhausen abandoned traditional musical form based on linear development and dramatic climax. This new approach, which he termed 'moment form', resembles the 'cinematic splice' techniques in early twentieth-century film." [85] The theremin had been in use since the 1920s but it attained a degree of popular recognition through its use in science-fiction film soundtrack music in the 1950s (e.g., Bernard Herrmann 's classic score for The Day the Earth Stood Still ). [86] In the UK in this period, the BBC Radiophonic Workshop (established in 1958) came to prominence, thanks in large measure to their work on the BBC science-fiction series Doctor Who . One of the most influential British electronic artists in this period [87] was Workshop staffer Delia Derbyshire , who is now famous for her 1963 electronic realisation of the iconic Doctor Who theme , composed by Ron Grainer . Israeli composer Josef Tal at the Electronic Music Studio in Jerusalem (c. 1965) with Hugh Le Caine 's Creative Tape Recorder (a sound synthesizer) aka "Multi-track" During the time of the UNESCO fellowship for studies in electronic music (1958) Josef Tal went on a study tour in the US and Canada. [88] He summarized his conclusions in two articles that he submitted to UNESCO. [89] In 1961, he established the Centre for Electronic Music in Israel at The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. In 1962, Hugh Le Caine arrived in Jerusalem to install his Creative Tape Recorder in the centre. [90] In the 1990s Tal conducted, together with Dr. Shlomo Markel, in cooperation with the Technion – Israel Institute of Technology , and the Volkswagen Foundation a research project ('Talmark') aimed at the development of a novel musical notation system for electronic music. [91] Milton Babbitt composed his first electronic work using the synthesizer—his Composition for Synthesizer (1961)—which he created using the RCA synthesizer at the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center. For Babbitt, the RCA synthesizer was a dream come true for three reasons. First, the ability to pinpoint and control every musical element precisely. Second, the time needed to realize his elaborate serial structures were brought within practical reach. Third, the question was no longer "What are the limits of the human performer?" but rather "What are the limits of human hearing?" [92] The collaborations also occurred across oceans and continents. In 1961, Ussachevsky invited Varèse to the Columbia-Princeton Studio (CPEMC). Upon arrival, Varese embarked upon a revision of Déserts. He was assisted by Mario Davidovsky and Bülent Arel . [93] The intense activity occurring at CPEMC and elsewhere inspired the establishment of the San Francisco Tape Music Center in 1963 by Morton Subotnick , with additional members Pauline Oliveros , Ramon Sender , Anthony Martin, and Terry Riley . [94] Later, the Center moved to Mills College , directed by Pauline Oliveros , and has since been renamed Center for Contemporary Music. [95] Pietro Grossi was an Italian pioneer of computer composition and tape music, who first experimented with electronic techniques in the early sixties. Grossi was a cellist and composer, born in Venice in 1917. He founded the S 2F M (Studio de Fonologia Musicale di Firenze) in 1963 to experiment with electronic sound and composition. Simultaneously in San Francisco, composer Stan Shaff and equipment designer Doug McEachern, presented the first "Audium" concert at San Francisco State College (1962), followed by work at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (1963), conceived of as in time, controlled movement of sound in space. Twelve speakers surrounded the audience, four speakers were mounted on a rotating, mobile-like construction above. [96] In an SFMOMA performance the following year (1964), San Francisco Chronicle music critic Alfred Frankenstein commented, "the possibilities of the space-sound continuum have seldom been so extensively explored". [96] In 1967, the first Audium , a "sound-space continuum" opened, holding weekly performances through 1970. In 1975, enabled by seed money from the National Endowment for the Arts , a new Audium opened, designed floor to ceiling for spatial sound composition and performance. [97] "In contrast, there are composers who manipulated sound space by locating multiple speakers at various locations in a performance space and then switching or panning the sound between the sources. In this approach, the composition of spatial manipulation is dependent on the location of the speakers and usually exploits the acoustical properties of the enclosure. Examples include Varese's Poeme Electronique (tape music performed in the Philips Pavilion of the 1958 World Fair, Brussels) and Stan Schaff's Audium installation, currently active in San Francisco." [98] [99] Through weekly programs (over 4,500 in 40 years), Shaff "sculpts" sound, performing now-digitized spatial works live through 176 speakers. [100] Jean-Jacques Perrey experimented with Schaeffer's techniques on tape loops and was among the first to use the recently released Moog synthesizer developed by Robert Moog. With this instrument he composed some works with Gershon Kingsley and solo. [101] A well-known example of the use of Moog's full-sized Moog modular synthesizer is the 1968 Switched-On Bach album by Wendy Carlos , which triggered a craze for synthesizer music. [102] In 1969 David Tudor brought a Moog modular synthesizer and Ampex tape machines to the National Institute of Design in Ahmedabad with the support of the Sarabhai family , forming the foundation of India's first electronic music studio. Here a group of composers Jinraj Joshipura, Gita Sarabhai, SC Sharma, IS Mathur and Atul Desai developed experimental sound compositions between 1969 and 1973. [103] See also: Music-N and Algorithmic composition Musical melodies were first generated by the computer CSIRAC in Australia in 1950. There were newspaper reports from America and England (early and recently) that computers may have played music earlier, but thorough research has debunked these stories as there is no evidence to support the newspaper reports (some of which were obviously speculative). Research has shown that people speculated about computers playing music, possibly because computers would make noises, [104] but there is no evidence that they actually did it. [105] [106] The world's first computer to play music was CSIRAC , which was designed and built by Trevor Pearcey and Maston Beard in the 1950s. Mathematician Geoff Hill programmed the CSIRAC to play popular musical melodies from the very early 1950s. In 1951 it publicly played the " Colonel Bogey March " [107] of which no known recordings exist. However, CSIRAC played standard repertoire and was not used to extend musical thinking or composition practice which is current computer-music practice. The first music to be performed in England was a performance of the British National Anthem that was programmed by Christopher Strachey on the Ferranti Mark I, late in 1951. Later that year, short extracts of three pieces were recorded there by a BBC outside broadcasting unit: the National Anthem, " Ba, Ba Black Sheep ", and " In the Mood " and this is recognised as the earliest recording of a computer to play music. This recording can be heard at this Manchester University site . Researchers at the University of Canterbury , Christchurch declicked and restored this recording in 2016 and the results may be heard on SoundCloud . [108] [109] [64] The late 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s also saw the development of large mainframe computer synthesis. Starting in 1957, Max Mathews of Bell Labs developed the MUSIC programs, culminating in MUSIC V , a direct digital synthesis language. [110] Laurie Spiegel developed the algorithmic musical composition software " Music Mouse " (1986) for Macintosh , Amiga , and Atari computers. Stochastic music[ edit ] This section may contain information not important or relevant to the article's subject. Please help improve this section . (October 2012) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) An important new development was the advent of computers to compose music, as opposed to manipulating or creating sounds. Iannis Xenakis began what is called musique stochastique, or stochastic music , which is a composing method that uses mathematical probability systems. Different probability algorithms were used to create a piece under a set of parameters. Xenakis used computers to compose pieces like ST/4 for string quartet and ST/48 for orchestra (both 1962), [111] Morsima-Amorsima, ST/10, and Atrées. He developed the computer system UPIC for translating graphical images into musical results and composed Mycènes Alpha (1978) with it. Main article: Live electronic music In Europe in 1964, Karlheinz Stockhausen composed Mikrophonie I for tam-tam , hand-held microphones, filters, and potentiometers, and Mixtur for orchestra, four sine-wave generators, and four ring modulators . In 1965 he composed Mikrophonie II for choir, Hammond organ, and ring modulators. [112] In 1966–1967, Reed Ghazala discovered and began to teach " circuit bending "—the application of the creative short circuit, a process of chance short-circuiting, creating experimental electronic instruments, exploring sonic elements mainly of timbre and with less regard to pitch or rhythm, and influenced by John Cage 's aleatoric music [ sic ] concept. [113] Cosey Fanni Tutti 's performance art and musical career explored the concept of 'acceptable' music and she went on to explore the use of sound as a means of desire or discomfort. [114] [ failed verification ] Wendy Carlos performed selections from her album Switched-On Bach on stage with a synthesizer with the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra ; another live performance was with Kurzweil Baroque Ensemble for "Bach at the Beacon" in 1997. [115] In June 2018, Suzanne Ciani released LIVE Quadraphonic, a live album documenting her first solo performance on a Buchla synthesizer in 40 years. It was one of the first quadraphonic vinyl releases in over 30 years. [116] Early electronic organ : Yamaha Electone D-1 (1959) In the 1950s, [117] [118] Japanese electronic musical instruments began influencing the international music industry . [119] [120] Ikutaro Kakehashi , who founded Ace Tone in 1960, developed his own version of electronic percussion that had been already popular on the overseas electronic organ. [121] At the 1964 NAMM Show , he revealed it as the R-1 Rhythm Ace, a hand-operated percussion device that played electronic drum sounds manually as the user pushed buttons, in a similar fashion to modern electronic drum pads. [121] [122] [123] Early drum machine : Korg Donca Matic DA-20 (1963) In 1963, Korg released the Donca-Matic DA-20 , an electro-mechanical drum machine . [124] In 1965, Nippon Columbia patented a fully electronic drum machine. [125] Korg released the Donca-Matic DC-11 electronic drum machine in 1966, which they followed with the Korg Mini Pops , which was developed as an option for the Yamaha Electone electric organ. [124] Korg's Stageman and Mini Pops series were notable for "natural metallic percussion" sounds and incorporating controls for drum " breaks and fill-ins ." [120] In 1967, Ace Tone founder Ikutaro Kakehashi patented a preset rhythm-pattern generator using diode matrix circuit [126] similar to the Seeburg 's prior U.S. patent 3,358,068 filed in 1964 (See Drum machine#History ), which he released as the FR-1 Rhythm Ace drum machine the same year. [121] It offered 16 preset patterns, and four buttons to manually play each instrument sound ( cymbal , claves , cowbell and bass drum ). The rhythm patterns could also be cascaded together by pushing multiple rhythm buttons simultaneously, and the possible combination of rhythm patterns were more than a hundred. [121] Ace Tone's Rhythm Ace drum machines found their way into popular music from the late 1960s, followed by Korg drum machines in the 1970s. [120] Kakehashi later left Ace Tone and founded Roland Corporation in 1972, with Roland synthesizers and drum machines becoming highly influential for the next several decades. [121] The company would go on to have a big impact on popular music , and do more to shape popular electronic music than any other company. [123] Direct-drive turntable : Technics SL-1200 (introduced in 1972) Turntablism has origins in the invention of direct-drive turntables . Early belt-drive turntables were unsuitable for turntablism, since they had a slow start-up time, and they were prone to wear-and-tear and breakage, as the belt would break from backspin or scratching. [127] The first direct-drive turntable was invented by Shuichi Obata, an engineer at Matsushita (now Panasonic ), [128] based in Osaka , Japan. It eliminated belts, and instead employed a motor to directly drive a platter on which a vinyl record rests. [129] In 1969, Matsushita released it as the SP-10 , [129] the first direct-drive turntable on the market, [130] and the first in their influential Technics series of turntables. [129] It was succeeded by the Technics SL-1100 and SL-1200 in the early 1970s, and they were widely adopted by hip hop musicians , [129] with the SL-1200 remaining the most widely used turntable in DJ culture for several decades. [131] Jamaican dub music[ edit ] See also: Sound system (Jamaican) In Jamaica , a form of popular electronic music emerged in the 1960s, dub music , rooted in sound system culture. Dub music was pioneered by studio engineers, such as Sylvan Morris, King Tubby , Errol Thompson , Lee "Scratch" Perry , and Scientist , producing reggae -influenced experimental music with electronic sound technology, in recording studios and at sound system parties. [132] Their experiments included forms of tape-based composition comparable to aspects of musique concrète , an emphasis on repetitive rhythmic structures (often stripped of their harmonic elements) comparable to minimalism , the electronic manipulation of spatiality, the sonic electronic manipulation of pre-recorded musical materials from mass media, deejays toasting over pre-recorded music comparable to live electronic music , [132] remixing music, [133] turntablism , [134] and the mixing and scratching of vinyl. [135] Despite the limited electronic equipment available to dub pioneers such as King Tubby and Lee "Scratch" Perry, their experiments in remix culture were musically cutting-edge. [133] King Tubby, for example, was a sound system proprietor and electronics technician, whose small front-room studio in the Waterhouse ghetto of western Kingston was a key site of dub music creation. [136] Late 1960s to early 1980s[ edit ] Rise of popular electronic music[ edit ] See also: Progressive rock , Krautrock , Space rock , and Contemporary electronic music In the late 1960s, pop and rock musicians, including the Beach Boys and the Beatles , began to use electronic instruments, like the theremin and Mellotron , to supplement and define their sound. The first bands to utilize the Moog synthesizer would be the Doors on Strange Days [137] as well as the Monkees on Pisces, Aquarius, Capricorn & Jones Ltd . In his book Electronic and Experimental Music, Thom Holmes recognises the Beatles' 1966 recording " Tomorrow Never Knows " as the song that "ushered in a new era in the use of electronic music in rock and pop music" due to the band's incorporation of tape loops and reversed and speed-manipulated tape sounds. [138] Also in the late 1960s, the music duos Silver Apples , Beaver and Krause , and experimental rock bands like White Noise , the United States of America , Fifty Foot Hose , and Gong are regarded as pioneers in the electronic rock and electronica genres for their work in melding psychedelic rock with oscillators and synthesizers. [139] [140] [141] [142] [143] [144] The 1969 instrumental " Popcorn " written by Gershon Kingsley for Music To Moog By became a worldwide success due to the 1972 version made by Hot Butter . [145] [146] In 1969, David Borden formed the world's first synthesizer ensemble called the Mother Mallard's Portable Masterpiece Company in Ithaca, New York. [147] Keith Emerson performing in Saint Petersburg in 2008 By the end of the 1960s, the Moog synthesizer took a leading place in the sound of emerging progressive rock with bands including Pink Floyd , Yes , Emerson, Lake & Palmer , and Genesis making them part of their sound. Instrumental prog rock was particularly significant in continental Europe, allowing bands like Kraftwerk , Tangerine Dream , Cluster , Can , Neu! , and Faust to circumvent the language barrier. [148] Their synthesiser-heavy " krautrock ", along with the work of Brian Eno (for a time the keyboard player with Roxy Music ), would be a major influence on subsequent electronic rock . [149] Ambient dub was pioneered by King Tubby and other Jamaican sound artists , using DJ-inspired ambient electronics, complete with drop-outs, echo, equalization and psychedelic electronic effects. It featured layering techniques and incorporated elements of world music , deep basslines and harmonic sounds. [150] Techniques such as a long echo delay were also used. [151] Other notable artists within the genre include Dreadzone , Higher Intelligence Agency , The Orb , Ott , Loop Guru , Woob and Transglobal Underground . [152] Dub music influenced electronic musical techniques later adopted by hip hop music when Jamaican immigrant DJ Kool Herc in the early 1970s introduced Jamaica's sound system culture and dub music techniques to America. One such technique that became popular in hip hop culture was playing two copies of the same record on two turntables in alternation, extending the b-dancers ' favorite section. [153] The turntable eventually went on to become the most visible electronic musical instrument, and occasionally the most virtuosic , in the 1980s and 1990s. [134] Electronic rock was also produced by several Japanese musicians, including Isao Tomita 's Electric Samurai: Switched on Rock (1972), which featured Moog synthesizer renditions of contemporary pop and rock songs, [154] and Osamu Kitajima 's progressive rock album Benzaiten (1974). [155] The mid-1970s saw the rise of electronic art music musicians such as Jean Michel Jarre , Vangelis , Tomita and Klaus Schulze who were significant influences on the development of new-age music . [150] The hi-tech appeal of these works created for some years the trend of listing the electronic musical equipment employed in the album sleeves, as a distinctive feature. Electronic music began to enter regularly in radio programming and top-sellers charts, as the French band Space with their debut studio album Magic Fly [156] or Jarre with Oxygène . [157] Between 1977 and 1981, Kraftwerk released albums such as Trans-Europe Express , The Man-Machine or Computer World , which influenced subgenres of electronic music. [158] In this era, the sound of rock musicians like Mike Oldfield and The Alan Parsons Project (who is credited the first rock song to feature a digital vocoder in 1975, The Raven ) used to be arranged and blended with electronic effects and/or music as well, which became much more prominent in the mid-1980s. Jeff Wayne achieved a long-lasting success [159] with his 1978 electronic rock musical version of The War of the Worlds . Film scores also benefit from the electronic sound. During the 1970s and 1980s, Wendy Carlos composed the score for A Clockwork Orange , The Shining and Tron . [160] In 1977, Gene Page recorded a disco version of the hit theme by John Williams from Steven Spielberg film Close Encounters of the Third Kind . Page's version peaked on the R&B chart at #30.[ citation needed ] The score of 1978 film Midnight Express composed by Italian synth-pioneer Giorgio Moroder won the Academy Award for Best Original Score in 1979 , as did it again in 1981 the score by Vangelis for Chariots of Fire . [161] After the arrival of punk rock , a form of basic electronic rock emerged, increasingly using new digital technology to replace other instruments. The American duo Suicide , who arose from the punk scene in New York, utilized drum machines and synthesizers in a hybrid between electronics and punk on their eponymous 1977 album . [162] Synth-pop pioneering bands which enjoyed success for years included Ultravox with their 1977 track "Hiroshima Mon Amour" on Ha!-Ha!-Ha! , [163] Yellow Magic Orchestra with their self-titled album (1978), The Buggles with their prominent 1979 debut single Video Killed the Radio Star , [164] Gary Numan with his solo debut album The Pleasure Principle and single Cars in 1979, [165] Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark with their 1979 single Electricity featured on their eponymous debut album , Depeche Mode with their first single Dreaming of Me recorded in 1980 and released in 1981 album Speak & Spell , [166] A Flock of Seagulls with their 1981 single Talking , [167] New Order with Ceremony [168] in 1981, and The Human League with their 1981 hit Don't You Want Me from their third album Dare . [169] New Order performing in Chile in 2019 The definition of MIDI and the development of digital audio made the development of purely electronic sounds much easier, [170] with audio engineers , producers and composers exploring frequently the possibilities of virtually every new model of electronic sound equipment launched by manufacturers. Synth-pop sometimes used synthesizers to replace all other instruments, but it was more common that bands had one or more keyboardists in their line-ups along with guitarists, bassists, and/or drummers. These developments led to the growth of synth-pop, which after it was adopted by the New Romantic movement, allowed synthesizers to dominate the pop and rock music of the early 1980s until the style began to fall from popularity in the mid-to-end of the decade. [169] Along with the aforementioned successful pioneers, key acts included Yazoo , Duran Duran , Spandau Ballet , Culture Club , Talk Talk , Japan , and Eurythmics . Synth-pop was taken up across the world, with international hits for acts including Men Without Hats , Trans-X and Lime from Canada, Telex from Belgium, Peter Schilling , Sandra , Modern Talking , Propaganda and Alphaville from Germany, Yello from Switzerland and Azul y Negro from Spain. Also, the synth sound is a key feature of Italo-disco . Some synth-pop bands created futuristic visual styles of themselves to reinforce the idea of electronic sounds were linked primarily with technology, as Americans Devo and Spaniards Aviador Dro . Keyboard synthesizers became so common that even heavy metal rock bands, a genre often regarded as the opposite in aesthetics, sound and lifestyle from that of electronic pop artists by fans of both sides, achieved worldwide success with themes as 1983 Jump [171] by Van Halen and 1986 The Final Countdown [172] by Europe , which feature synths prominently. Proliferation of electronic music research institutions[ edit ] Elektronmusikstudion [ sv ] (EMS), formerly known as Electroacoustic Music in Sweden, is the Swedish national centre for electronic music and sound art . The research organisation started in 1964 and is based in Stockholm. IRCAM at the Place Igor Stravinsky, Paris STEIM is a center for research and development of new musical instruments in the electronic performing arts, located in Amsterdam, Netherlands. STEIM has existed since 1969. It was founded by Misha Mengelberg , Louis Andriessen , Peter Schat , Dick Raaymakers , Jan van Vlijmen [ nl ], Reinbert de Leeuw , and Konrad Boehmer . This group of Dutch composers had fought for the reformation of Amsterdam's feudal music structures; they insisted on Bruno Maderna's appointment as musical director of the Concertgebouw Orchestra and enforced the first public fundings for experimental and improvised electronic music in the Netherlands. IRCAM in Paris became a major center for computer music research and realization and development of the Sogitec 4X computer system, [173] featuring then revolutionary real-time digital signal processing. Pierre Boulez 's Répons (1981) for 24 musicians and 6 soloists used the 4X to transform and route soloists to a loudspeaker system. Barry Vercoe describes one of his experiences with early computer sounds: Sogitec 4X (c. 1983) [174] at IRCAM machine room in 1989 At IRCAM in Paris in 1982, flutist Larry Beauregard had connected his flute to DiGiugno's 4X audio processor, enabling real-time pitch-following. On a Guggenheim at the time, I extended this concept to real-time score-following with automatic synchronized accompaniment, and over the next two years Larry and I gave numerous demonstrations of the computer as a chamber musician, playing Handel flute sonatas, Boulez 's Sonatine for flute and piano and by 1984 my own Synapse II for flute and computer—the first piece ever composed expressly for such a setup. A major challenge was finding the right software constructs to support highly sensitive and responsive accompaniment. All of this was pre-MIDI, but the results were impressive even though heavy doses of tempo rubato would continually surprise my Synthetic Performer. In 1985 we solved the tempo rubato problem by incorporating learning from rehearsals (each time you played this way the machine would get better). We were also now tracking violin, since our brilliant, young flautist had contracted a fatal cancer. Moreover, this version used a new standard called MIDI, and here I was ably assisted by former student Miller Puckette, whose initial concepts for this task he later expanded into a program called MAX . [175]
Toggle the table of contents Country music From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American music genre This article is about the music genre. For other uses, see Country music (disambiguation) . 2024 in country music Country (also called country and western) is a music genre originating in the Southern and Southwestern United States . First produced in the 1920s, country music primarily focuses on working-class Americans and blue-collar American life. [2] Country music is known for its ballads and dance tunes (also known as " honky-tonk music ") with simple form, folk lyrics, and harmonies generally accompanied by instruments such as banjos , fiddles , harmonicas , and many types of guitar (including acoustic , electric , steel , and resonator guitars). [3] [4] [5] Though it is primarily rooted in various forms of American folk music , such as old-time music and Appalachian music , [6] [7] many other traditions, including Mexican , Irish , and Hawaiian music, have had a formative influence on the genre. [8] Blues modes have been used extensively throughout its history as well. [9] The term country music gained popularity in the 1940s in preference to hillbilly music; it came to encompass western music , which evolved parallel to hillbilly music from similar roots, in the mid-20th century. Contemporary styles of western music include Texas country , red dirt , and Hispano- and Mexican American -led Tejano and New Mexico music , [10] [11] which still exists alongside longstanding indigenous traditions . In 2009, in the United States, country music was the most-listened-to rush-hour radio genre during the evening commute, and second-most popular in the morning commute. [12] Main articles: Appalachian music , Blues , Celtic folk , Old-time music , and Western music (North America) The main components of the modern country music style date back to music traditions throughout the Southern United States and Southwestern United States , while its place in American popular music was established in the 1920s during the early days of music recording. [13] According to country historian Bill C. Malone , country music was "introduced to the world as a Southern phenomenon." [14] Migration into the southern Appalachian Mountains , of the Southeastern United States , brought the folk music and instruments of Europe , Africa , and the Mediterranean Basin along with it for nearly 300 years, which developed into Appalachian music . As the country expanded westward, the Mississippi River and Louisiana became a crossroads for country music, giving rise to Cajun music . In the Southwestern United States, it was the Rocky Mountains , American frontier , and Rio Grande that acted as a similar backdrop for Native American , Mexican , and cowboy ballads, which resulted in New Mexico music and the development of western music , and it is directly related to Red Dirt, Texas country, and Tejano music styles. In the Asia-Pacific , the steel guitar sound of country music has its provenance in the music of Hawaii . [15] [16] Role of East Tennessee[ edit ] Main article: Music of East Tennessee The U.S. Congress has formally recognized Bristol, Tennessee as the "Birthplace of Country Music", [17] based on the historic Bristol recording sessions of 1927. [18] [19] [20] Since 2014, the city has been home to the Birthplace of Country Music Museum . [21] [22] Historians have also noted the influence of the less-known Johnson City sessions of 1928 and 1929, [23] [24] and the Knoxville sessions of 1929 and 1930. [25] In addition, the Mountain City Fiddlers Convention , held in 1925, helped to inspire modern country music. Before these, pioneer settlers, in the Great Smoky Mountains region, had developed a rich musical heritage. [26] Generations[ edit ] The first generation emerged in the 1920s, with Atlanta's music scene playing a major role in launching country's earliest recording artists. James Gideon "Gid" Tanner (1885–1960) was an American old-time fiddler and one of the earliest stars of what would come to be known as country music. His band, the Skillet Lickers , was one of the most innovative and influential string bands of the 1920s and 1930s. Its most notable members were Clayton McMichen (fiddle and vocal), Dan Hornsby (vocals), Riley Puckett (guitar and vocal) and Robert Lee Sweat (guitar). New York City record label Okeh Records began issuing hillbilly music records by Fiddlin' John Carson as early as 1923, followed by Columbia Records (series 15000D "Old Familiar Tunes") ( Samantha Bumgarner ) in 1924, and RCA Victor Records in 1927 with the first famous pioneers of the genre Jimmie Rodgers , who is widely considered the "Father of Country Music", and the first family of country music the Carter Family . [27] Many "hillbilly" musicians recorded blues songs throughout the 1920s. [28] During the second generation (1930s–1940s), radio became a popular source of entertainment, and "barn dance" shows featuring country music were started all over the South, as far north as Chicago, and as far west as California. The most important was the Grand Ole Opry , aired starting in 1925 by WSM in Nashville and continuing to the present day. During the 1930s and 1940s, cowboy songs, or western music, which had been recorded since the 1920s, were popularized by films made in Hollywood, many featuring Gene Autry , who was known as king of the "singing cowboys," and Hank Williams . Bob Wills was another country musician from the Lower Great Plains who had become very popular as the leader of a " hot string band ," and who also appeared in Hollywood westerns . His mix of country and jazz , which started out as dance hall music, would become known as western swing . Wills was one of the first country musicians known to have added an electric guitar to his band, in 1938. [29] Country musicians began recording boogie in 1939, shortly after it had been played at Carnegie Hall , when Johnny Barfield recorded "Boogie Woogie". The third generation (1950s–1960s) started at the end of World War II with "mountaineer" string band music known as bluegrass , which emerged when Bill Monroe , along with Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs were introduced by Roy Acuff at the Grand Ole Opry. Gospel music remained a popular component of country music. The Native American , Hispano, and American frontier music of the Southwestern United States and Northern Mexico , became popular among poor communities in New Mexico , Oklahoma , and Texas ; the basic ensemble consisted of classical guitar , bass guitar , dobro or steel guitar, though some larger ensembles featured electric guitars , trumpets , keyboards (especially the honky-tonk piano, a type of tack piano ), banjos , and drums . By the early 1950s it blended with rock and roll , becoming the rockabilly sound produced by Sam Phillips , Norman Petty , and Bob Keane . Musicians like Elvis Presley , Bo Diddley , Buddy Holly , Jerry Lee Lewis , Ritchie Valens , Carl Perkins , Roy Orbison , and Johnny Cash emerged as enduring representatives of the style. Beginning in the mid-1950s, and reaching its peak during the early 1960s, the Nashville sound turned country music into a multimillion-dollar industry centered in Nashville, Tennessee ; Patsy Cline and Jim Reeves were two of the most broadly popular Nashville sound artists, and their deaths in separate plane crashes in the early 1960s were a factor in the genre's decline. Starting in the 1950s to the mid-1960s, western singer-songwriters such as Michael Martin Murphey and Marty Robbins rose in prominence as did others, throughout western music traditions, like New Mexico music 's Al Hurricane . The late 1960s in American music produced a unique blend as a result of traditionalist backlash within separate genres. In the aftermath of the British Invasion , many desired a return to the "old values" of rock n' roll. At the same time there was a lack of enthusiasm in the country sector for Nashville-produced music. What resulted was a crossbred genre known as country rock . Fourth generation (1970s–1980s) music included outlaw country with roots in the Bakersfield sound , and country pop with roots in the countrypolitan , folk music and soft rock . Between 1972 and 1975 singer/guitarist John Denver released a series of hugely successful songs blending country and folk-rock musical styles. By the mid-1970s, Texas country and Tejano music gained popularity with performers like Freddie Fender . During the early 1980s country artists continued to see their records perform well on the pop charts. In 1980 a style of "neocountry disco music" was popularized. During the mid-1980s a group of new artists began to emerge who rejected the more polished country-pop sound that had been prominent on radio and the charts in favor of more traditional "back-to-basics" production. During the fifth generation (the 1990s), neotraditionalists and stadium country acts prospered. The sixth generation (2000s–present) has seen a certain amount of diversification in regard to country music styles. It has also, however, seen a shift into patriotism and conservative politics since 9/11 , though such themes are less prevalent in more modern trends. [30] The influence of rock music in country has become more overt during the late 2000s and early 2010s. Most of the best-selling country songs of this era were those by Lady A , Florida Georgia Line , Carrie Underwood , and Taylor Swift . [31] Hip hop also made its mark on country music with the emergence of country rap . [32] As a result, the difference between what is considered country music and other types of musical genres nowadays has less to do with the music and more to do with a performer's clothing, accent and cultural references in a song. First generation (1920s)[ edit ] Vernon Dalhart was the first country star to have a major hit record The first commercial recordings of what was considered instrumental music in the traditional country style were " Arkansas Traveler " and " Turkey in the Straw " by fiddlers Henry Gilliland & A.C. (Eck) Robertson on June 30, 1922, for Victor Records and released in April 1923. [33] [34] Columbia Records began issuing records with "hillbilly" music (series 15000D "Old Familiar Tunes") as early as 1924. [27] The Carter Family are a dynasty of country music and began with (left to right) A.P. Carter , wife Sara Carter and Maybelle Carter The first commercial recording of what is widely considered to be the first country song featuring vocals and lyrics was Fiddlin' John Carson with " Little Log Cabin in the Lane " for Okeh Records on June 14, 1923. [35] [36] Vernon Dalhart was the first country singer to have a nationwide hit in May 1924 with " Wreck of the Old 97 ". [37] [38] The flip side of the record was "Lonesome Road Blues", which also became very popular. [39] In April 1924, "Aunt" Samantha Bumgarner and Eva Davis became the first female musicians to record and release country songs. [40] The record 129-D produced by Columbia features Samantha playing fiddle and singing Big-Eyed Rabbit while Eva Davis plays banjo. The other side features Eva Davis playing banjo while singing Wild Bill Jones. Many of the early country musicians, such as the yodeler Cliff Carlisle , recorded blues songs into the 1930s. [41] Other important early recording artists were Riley Puckett , Don Richardson , Fiddlin' John Carson , Uncle Dave Macon , Al Hopkins , Ernest V. Stoneman , Blind Alfred Reed , Charlie Poole and the North Carolina Ramblers and the Skillet Lickers . [42] The steel guitar entered country music as early as 1922, when Jimmie Tarlton met famed Hawaiian guitarist Frank Ferera on the West Coast. [43] Jimmie Rodgers and the Carter Family are widely considered to be important early country musicians. From Scott County, Virginia , the Carters had learned sight reading of hymnals and sheet music using solfege .[ citation needed ] Their songs were first captured at a historic recording session in Bristol, Tennessee , on August 1, 1927, where Ralph Peer was the talent scout and sound recordist. [44] [45] A scene in the movie O Brother, Where Art Thou? depicts a similar occurrence in the same timeframe. Rodgers fused hillbilly country, gospel, jazz, blues, pop, cowboy, and folk, and many of his best songs were his compositions, including "Blue Yodel", [46] which sold over a million records and established Rodgers as the premier singer of early country music. [47] [48] Beginning in 1927, and for the next 17 years, the Carters recorded some 300 old-time ballads, traditional tunes, country songs and gospel hymns, all representative of America's southeastern folklore and heritage. [49] Maybelle Carter went on to continue the family tradition with her daughters as The Carter Sisters ; her daughter June would marry (in succession) Carl Smith , Rip Nix and Johnny Cash , having children with each who would also become country singers. Second generation (1930s–1940s)[ edit ] Roy Acuff Record sales declined during the Great Depression , but radio became a popular source of entertainment, and "barn dance" shows featuring country music were started by radio stations all over the South, as far north as Chicago, and as far west as California. The most important was the Grand Ole Opry , aired starting in 1925 by WSM in Nashville and continuing to the present day. [50] Some of the early stars on the Opry were Uncle Dave Macon , Roy Acuff and African American harmonica player DeFord Bailey . WSM's 50,000-watt signal (in 1934) could often be heard across the country. [51] Many musicians performed and recorded songs in any number of styles. Moon Mullican , for example, played western swing but also recorded songs that can be called rockabilly . Between 1947 and 1949, country crooner Eddy Arnold placed eight songs in the top 10. [52] From 1945 to 1955 Jenny Lou Carson was one of the most prolific songwriters in country music. [53] Singing cowboys and western swing[ edit ] Publicity photo of Roy Rogers and Gail Davis , 1948 In the 1930s and 1940s, cowboy songs, or western music, which had been recorded since the 1920s, were popularized by films made in Hollywood. Some of the popular singing cowboys from the era were Gene Autry , the Sons of the Pioneers , and Roy Rogers . [54] Country music and western music were frequently played together on the same radio stations, hence the term country and western music, despite country and western being two distinct genres. Cowgirls contributed to the sound in various family groups. Patsy Montana opened the door for female artists with her history-making song "I Want To Be a Cowboy's Sweetheart". This would begin a movement toward opportunities for women to have successful solo careers. Bob Wills was another country musician from the Lower Great Plains who had become very popular as the leader of a " hot string band ," and who also appeared in Hollywood westerns . His mix of country and jazz , which started out as dance hall music, would become known as western swing . Cliff Bruner , Moon Mullican , Milton Brown and Adolph Hofner were other early western swing pioneers. Spade Cooley and Tex Williams also had very popular bands and appeared in films. At its height, western swing rivaled the popularity of big band swing music. Changing instrumentation[ edit ] Drums were scorned by early country musicians as being "too loud" and "not pure", but by 1935 western swing big band leader Bob Wills had added drums to the Texas Playboys . In the mid-1940s, the Grand Ole Opry did not want the Playboys' drummer to appear on stage. Although drums were commonly used by rockabilly groups by 1955, the less-conservative-than-the-Grand-Ole-Opry Louisiana Hayride kept its infrequently used drummer backstage as late as 1956. By the early 1960s, however, it was rare for a country band not to have a drummer. [55] Bob Wills was one of the first country musicians known to have added an electric guitar to his band, in 1938. [29] A decade later (1948) Arthur Smith achieved top 10 US country chart success with his MGM Records recording of " Guitar Boogie ", which crossed over to the US pop chart, introducing many people to the potential of the electric guitar. For several decades Nashville session players preferred the warm tones of the Gibson and Gretsch archtop electrics, but a "hot" Fender style, using guitars which became available beginning in the early 1950s, eventually prevailed as the signature guitar sound of country. [55] [56] Hillbilly boogie[ edit ] Country musicians began recording boogie in 1939, shortly after it had been played at Carnegie Hall , when Johnny Barfield recorded "Boogie Woogie". The trickle of what was initially called hillbilly boogie, or okie boogie (later to be renamed country boogie), became a flood beginning in late 1945. One notable release from this period was the Delmore Brothers ' "Freight Train Boogie", considered to be part of the combined evolution of country music and blues towards rockabilly . In 1948, Arthur "Guitar Boogie" Smith achieved top ten US country chart success with his MGM Records recordings of " Guitar Boogie " and "Banjo Boogie", with the former crossing over to the US pop charts. [57] Other country boogie artists included Moon Mullican , Merrill Moore and Tennessee Ernie Ford . The hillbilly boogie period lasted into the 1950s and remains one of many subgenres of country into the 21st century. Bluegrass, folk and gospel[ edit ] Main article: Bluegrass music Bill and Charlie Monroe (1936). Bill Monroe (1911–1996) and the Blue Grass Boys created the bluegrass by the end of World War II. By the end of World War II , "mountaineer" string band music known as bluegrass had emerged when Bill Monroe joined with Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs , introduced by Roy Acuff at the Grand Ole Opry. That was the ordination of bluegrass music and how Bill Monroe came to be known as the "Father of Bluegrass." Gospel music , too, remained a popular component of bluegrass and other sorts of country music. Red Foley , the biggest country star following World War II, had one of the first million-selling gospel hits (" Peace in the Valley ") and also sang boogie, blues and rockabilly. In the post-war period, country music was called "folk" in the trades, and "hillbilly" within the industry. [58] In 1944, Billboard replaced the term "hillbilly" with "folk songs and blues," and switched to "country and western" in 1949. [59] [60] Hank Williams Another type of stripped-down and raw music with a variety of moods and a basic ensemble of guitar, bass, dobro or steel guitar (and later) drums became popular, especially among rural residents in the three states of Texhomex , those being Texas , Oklahoma , and New Mexico . [61] It became known as honky tonk and had its roots in western swing and the ranchera music of Mexico and the border states, particularly New Mexico and Texas, [62] together with the blues of the American South. Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys personified this music which has been described as "a little bit of this, and a little bit of that, a little bit of black and a little bit of white ... just loud enough to keep you from thinking too much and to go right on ordering the whiskey." [63] East Texan Al Dexter had a hit with "Honky Tonk Blues", and seven years later " Pistol Packin' Mama ". [64] These "honky tonk" songs were associated with barrooms, and was performed by the likes of Ernest Tubb , Kitty Wells (the first major female country solo singer), Ted Daffan , Floyd Tillman , the Maddox Brothers and Rose , Lefty Frizzell and Hank Williams ; the music of these artists would later be called "traditional" country. Williams' influence in particular would prove to be enormous, inspiring many of the pioneers of rock and roll, [65] such as Elvis Presley , Jerry Lee Lewis , Chuck Berry and Ike Turner , while providing a framework for emerging honky tonk talents like George Jones . Webb Pierce was the top-charting country artist of the 1950s, with 13 of his singles spending 113 weeks at number one. He charted 48 singles during the decade; 31 reached the top ten and 26 reached the top four. Third generation (1950s–1960s)[ edit ] See also: 1950s in music and 1960s in music By the early 1950s, a blend of western swing, country boogie, and honky tonk was played by most country bands, a mixture which followed in the footsteps of Gene Autry , Lydia Mendoza , Roy Rogers , and Patsy Montana . Western music, influenced by the cowboy ballads, New Mexico , Texas country and Tejano music rhythms of the Southwestern United States and Northern Mexico , reached its peak in popularity in the late 1950s, most notably with the song " El Paso ", first recorded by Marty Robbins in September 1959. Western music's influence would continue to grow within the country music sphere, western musicians like Michael Martin Murphey , New Mexico music artists Al Hurricane and Antonia Apodaca , Tejano music performer Little Joe , and even folk revivalist John Denver , all first rose to prominence during this time. This western music influence largely kept the music of the folk revival and folk rock from influencing the country music genre much, despite the similarity in instrumentation and origins (see, for instance, the Byrds ' negative reception during their appearance on the Grand Ole Opry). The main concern was largely political: most folk revival was largely driven by progressive activists, a stark contrast to the culturally conservative audiences of country music. John Denver was perhaps the only musician to have major success in both the country and folk revival genres throughout his career, later only a handful of artists like Burl Ives and Canadian musician Gordon Lightfoot successfully made the crossover to country after folk revival fell out of fashion. During the mid-1950s a new style of country music became popular, eventually to be referred to as rockabilly. [66] Bill Haley & His Comets in 1956 In 1953, the first all-country radio station was established in Lubbock, Texas . [67] The music of the 1960s and 1970s targeted the American working class, and truckers in particular. As country radio became more popular, trucking songs like the 1963 hit song Six Days on the Road by Dave Dudley began to make up their own subgenre of country. These revamped songs sought to portray American truckers as a "new folk hero", marking a significant shift in sound from earlier country music. The song was written by actual truckers and contained numerous references to the trucker culture of the time like "ICC" for Interstate Commerce Commission and "little white pills" as a reference to amphetamines . Starday Records in Nashville followed up on Dudley's initial success with the release of Give Me 40 Acres by the Willis Brothers . [67] Johnny Cash Rockabilly was most popular with country fans in the 1950s; one of the first rock and roll superstars was former western yodeler Bill Haley , who repurposed his Four Aces of Western Swing into a rockabilly band in the early 1950s and renamed it the Comets . Bill Haley & His Comets are credited with two of the first successful rock and roll records, " Crazy Man, Crazy " of 1953 and " Rock Around the Clock " in 1954. [68] 1956 could be called the year of rockabilly in country music. Rockabilly was an early form of rock and roll , an upbeat combination of blues and country music. [69] The number two, three and four songs on Billboard's charts for that year were Elvis Presley , " Heartbreak Hotel "; Johnny Cash , " I Walk the Line "; and Carl Perkins , " Blue Suede Shoes ". Reflecting this success, George Jones released a rockabilly record that year under the pseudonym "Thumper Jones", wanting to capitalize on the popularity of rockabilly without alienating his traditional country base. [70] Cash and Presley placed songs in the top 5 in 1958 with No. 3 "Guess Things Happen That Way/Come In, Stranger" by Cash, and No. 5 by Presley "Don't/I Beg of You." [71] Presley acknowledged the influence of rhythm and blues artists and his style, saying "The colored folk been singin' and playin' it just the way I'm doin' it now, man for more years than I know." Within a few years, many rockabilly musicians returned to a more mainstream style or had defined their own unique style. Country music gained national television exposure through Ozark Jubilee on ABC-TV and radio from 1955 to 1960 from Springfield, Missouri . The program showcased top stars including several rockabilly artists, some from the Ozarks . As Webb Pierce put it in 1956, "Once upon a time, it was almost impossible to sell country music in a place like New York City. Nowadays, television takes us everywhere, and country music records and sheet music sell as well in large cities as anywhere else." [72] The Country Music Association was founded in 1958, in part because numerous country musicians were appalled by the increased influence of rock and roll on country music. [73] The Nashville and countrypolitan sounds[ edit ] Main article: Nashville sound Beginning in the mid-1950s, and reaching its peak during the early 1960s, the Nashville sound turned country music into a multimillion-dollar industry centered in Nashville, Tennessee . Under the direction of producers such as Chet Atkins , Bill Porter , Paul Cohen , Owen Bradley , Bob Ferguson , and later Billy Sherrill , the sound brought country music to a diverse audience and helped revive country as it emerged from a commercially fallow period. This subgenre was notable for borrowing from 1950s pop stylings: a prominent and smooth vocal, backed by a string section (violins and other orchestral strings) and vocal chorus. Instrumental soloing was de-emphasized in favor of trademark "licks". Leading artists in this genre included Jim Reeves , Skeeter Davis , Connie Smith , the Browns , [74] Patsy Cline , and Eddy Arnold . The "slip note" piano style of session musician Floyd Cramer was an important component of this style. [75] The Nashville Sound collapsed in mainstream popularity in 1964, a victim of both the British Invasion and the deaths of Reeves and Cline in separate airplane crashes. By the mid-1960s, the genre had developed into countrypolitan . Countrypolitan was aimed straight at mainstream markets, and it sold well throughout the later 1960s into the early 1970s. Top artists included Tammy Wynette , Lynn Anderson and Charlie Rich , as well as such former "hard country" artists as Ray Price and Marty Robbins . Despite the appeal of the Nashville sound, many traditional country artists emerged during this period and dominated the genre: Loretta Lynn , Merle Haggard , Buck Owens , Porter Wagoner , George Jones , and Sonny James among them. Main article: Country soul In 1962, Ray Charles surprised the pop world by turning his attention to country and western music, topping the charts and rating number three for the year on Billboard's pop chart [76] with the " I Can't Stop Loving You " single, and recording the landmark album Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music . [77] Bakersfield sound[ edit ] Another subgenre of country music grew out of hardcore honky tonk with elements of western swing and originated 112 miles (180 km) north-northwest of Los Angeles in Bakersfield, California , where many " Okies " and other Dust Bowl migrants had settled. Influenced by one-time West Coast residents Bob Wills and Lefty Frizzell , by 1966 it was known as the Bakersfield sound . It relied on electric instruments and amplification, in particular the Telecaster electric guitar, more than other subgenres of the country music of the era, and it can be described as having a sharp, hard, driving, no-frills, edgy flavor—hard guitars and honky-tonk harmonies. [67] Leading practitioners of this style were Buck Owens , Merle Haggard , Tommy Collins , Dwight Yoakam , Gary Allan , and Wynn Stewart , each of whom had his own style. [78] [79] Ken Nelson , who had produced Owens and Haggard and Rose Maddox became interested in the trucking song subgenre following the success of Six Days on the Road and asked Red Simpson to record an album of trucking songs. Haggard's White Line Fever was also part of the trucking subgenre. [67] Western music merges with country[ edit ] See also: Western music (North America) The country music scene of the 1940s until the 1970s was largely dominated by western music influences, so much so that the genre began to be called "country and western". [80] Even today, cowboy and frontier values continue to play a role in the larger country music, with western wear , cowboy boots , and cowboy hats continues to be in fashion for country artists. [81] West of the Mississippi river , many of these western genres continue to flourish, including the Red Dirt of Oklahoma , [82] New Mexico music of New Mexico , [83] and both Texas country music and Tejano music of Texas . [84] [85] During the 1950s until the early 1970s, the latter part of the western heyday in country music, many of these genres featured popular artists that continue to influence both their distinctive genres and larger country music. Red Dirt featured Bob Childers and Steve Ripley ; for New Mexico music Al Hurricane , Al Hurricane Jr. , and Antonia Apodaca ; and within the Texas scenes Willie Nelson , Freddie Fender , Johnny Rodriguez , and Little Joe . As Outlaw country music emerged as subgenre in its own right, Red Dirt, New Mexico, Texas country, and Tejano grew in popularity as a part of the Outlaw country movement. Originating in the bars, fiestas, and honky-tonks of Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Texas, their music supplemented outlaw country's singer-songwriter tradition as well as 21st-century rock -inspired alternative country and hip hop -inspired country rap artists. [86] Example of cowboy hat and cowboy boots , two prominent components of country music fashion Main article: Outlaw country Outlaw country was derived from the traditional western, including Red Dirt , New Mexico , Texas country , Tejano , and honky-tonk musical styles of the late 1950s and 1960s. Songs such as the 1963 Johnny Cash popularized " Ring of Fire " show clear influences from the likes of Al Hurricane and Little Joe , this influence just happened to culminate with artists such as Ray Price (whose band, the "Cherokee Cowboys", included Willie Nelson and Roger Miller ) and mixed with the anger of an alienated subculture of the nation during the period, a collection of musicians that came to be known as the outlaw movement revolutionized the genre of country music in the early 1970s. [87] [88] "After I left Nashville (the early 70s), I wanted to relax and play the music that I wanted to play, and just stay around Texas, maybe Oklahoma. Waylon and I had that outlaw image going, and when it caught on at colleges and we started selling records, we were O.K. The whole outlaw thing, it had nothing to do with the music, it was something that got written in an article, and the young people said, 'Well, that's pretty cool.' And started listening." (Willie Nelson) [89] The term outlaw country is traditionally associated with Willie Nelson , Jerry Jeff Walker , [90] Hank Williams, Jr. , Merle Haggard, Waylon Jennings and Joe Ely . [91] It was encapsulated in the 1976 album Wanted! The Outlaws . Though the outlaw movement as a cultural fad had died down after the late 1970s (with Jennings noting in 1978 that it had gotten out of hand and led to real-life legal scrutiny), many western and outlaw country music artists maintained their popularity during the 1980s by forming supergroups , such as The Highwaymen , [92] Texas Tornados , [93] and Bandido . [94] John Denver (1975) Country pop or soft pop, with roots in the countrypolitan sound, folk music, and soft rock , is a subgenre that first emerged in the 1970s. Although the term first referred to country music songs and artists that crossed over to top 40 radio, country pop acts are now more likely to cross over to adult contemporary music . It started with pop music singers like Glen Campbell , Bobbie Gentry , John Denver , Olivia Newton-John , Anne Murray , B. J. Thomas , the Bellamy Brothers , and Linda Ronstadt having hits on the country charts. Between 1972 and 1975, singer/guitarist John Denver released a series of hugely successful songs blending country and folk-rock musical styles (" Rocky Mountain High ", " Sunshine on My Shoulders ", " Annie's Song ", " Thank God I'm a Country Boy ", and " I'm Sorry "), and was named Country Music Entertainer of the Year in 1975. The year before, Olivia Newton-John, an Australian pop singer, won the "Best Female Country Vocal Performance" as well as the Country Music Association's most coveted award for females, "Female Vocalist of the Year". In response George Jones, Tammy Wynette, Jean Shepard and other traditional Nashville country artists dissatisfied with the new trend formed the short-lived "Association of Country Entertainers" in 1974; the ACE soon unraveled in the wake of Jones and Wynette's bitter divorce and Shepard's realization that most others in the industry lacked her passion for the movement. Dolly Parton During the mid-1970s, Dolly Parton , a successful mainstream country artist since the late 1960s, mounted a high-profile campaign to cross over to pop music, culminating in her 1977 hit " Here You Come Again ", which topped the U.S. country singles chart, and also reached No. 3 on the pop singles charts. Parton's male counterpart, Kenny Rogers , came from the opposite direction, aiming his music at the country charts, after a successful career in pop, rock and folk music with the First Edition , achieving success the same year with " Lucille ", which topped the country charts and reached No. 5 on the U.S. pop singles charts, as well as reaching Number 1 on the British all-genre chart. Parton and Rogers would both continue to have success on both country and pop charts simultaneously, well into the 1980s. Country music propelled Kenny Rogers’ career, making him a three-time Grammy Award winner and six-time Country Music Association Awards winner. Having sold more than 50 million albums in the US, one of his Song "The Gambler," inspired several TV films, with Rogers as the main character. [95] Artists like Crystal Gayle , Ronnie Milsap and Barbara Mandrell would also find success on the pop charts with their records. In 1975, author Paul Hemphill stated in the Saturday Evening Post, "Country music isn't really country anymore; it is a hybrid of nearly every form of popular music in America." [96] During the early 1980s, country artists continued to see their records perform well on the pop charts. Willie Nelson and Juice Newton each had two songs in the top 5 of the Billboard Hot 100 in the early eighties: Nelson charted " Always on My Mind " (#5, 1982) and " To All the Girls I've Loved Before " (#5, 1984, a duet with Julio Iglesias ), and Newton achieved success with " Queen of Hearts " (#2, 1981) and " Angel of the Morning " (#4, 1981). Four country songs topped the Billboard Hot 100 in the 1980s: " Lady " by Kenny Rogers , from the late fall of 1980; " 9 to 5 " by Dolly Parton , " I Love a Rainy Night " by Eddie Rabbitt (these two back-to-back at the top in early 1981); and " Islands in the Stream ", a duet by Dolly Parton and Kenny Rogers in 1983, a pop-country crossover hit written by Barry, Robin, and Maurice Gibb of the Bee Gees . Newton's "Queen of Hearts" almost reached No. 1, but was kept out of the spot by the pop ballad juggernaut " Endless Love " by Diana Ross and Lionel Richie . [97] The move of country music toward neotraditional styles led to a marked decline in country/pop crossovers in the late 1980s, and only one song in that period— Roy Orbison 's " You Got It ", from 1989—made the top 10 of both the Billboard Hot Country Singles " and Hot 100 charts, due largely to a revival of interest in Orbison after his sudden death. [98] [99] The only song with substantial country airplay to reach number one on the pop charts in the late 1980s was " At This Moment " by Billy Vera and the Beaters, an R&B song with slide guitar embellishment that appeared at number 42 on the country charts from minor crossover airplay. [100] The record-setting, multi-platinum group Alabama was named Artist of the Decade for the 1980s by the Academy of Country Music. See also: Cowpunk A reunited Eagles in 2008 Country rock is a genre that started in the 1960s but became prominent in the 1970s. The late 1960s in American music produced a unique blend as a result of traditionalist backlash within separate genres. In the aftermath of the British Invasion , many desired a return to the "old values" of rock n' roll. At the same time there was a lack of enthusiasm in the country sector for Nashville-produced music. What resulted was a crossbred genre known as country rock . Early innovators in this new style of music in the 1960s and 1970s included Bob Dylan , who was the first to revert to country music with his 1967 album John Wesley Harding [101] (and even more so with that album's follow-up, Nashville Skyline ), followed by Gene Clark , Clark's former band the Byrds (with Gram Parsons on Sweetheart of the Rodeo ) and its spin-off the Flying Burrito Brothers (also featuring Gram Parsons), guitarist Clarence White , Michael Nesmith ( the Monkees and the First National Band ), the Grateful Dead , Neil Young , Commander Cody , the Allman Brothers Band , Charlie Daniels , the Marshall Tucker Band , Poco , Buffalo Springfield , Stephen Stills ' band Manassas and Eagles , among many, even the former folk music duo Ian & Sylvia , who formed Great Speckled Bird in 1969. The Eagles would become the most successful of these country rock acts, and their compilation album Their Greatest Hits (1971–1975) remains the second-best-selling album in the US with 29 million copies sold. [102] The Rolling Stones also got into the act with songs like " Dead Flowers "; the original recording of " Honky Tonk Women " was performed in a country style, but it was subsequently re-recorded in a hard rock style for the single version, and the band's preferred country version was later released on the album Let It Bleed , under the title "Country Honk". Described by AllMusic as the "father of country-rock", [103] Gram Parsons' work in the early 1970s was acclaimed for its purity and for his appreciation for aspects of traditional country music. [104] Though his career was cut tragically short by his 1973 death, his legacy was carried on by his protégé and duet partner Emmylou Harris ; Harris would release her debut solo in 1975, an amalgamation of country, rock and roll, folk, blues and pop. Subsequent to the initial blending of the two polar opposite genres, other offspring soon resulted, including Southern rock , heartland rock and in more recent years, alternative country . In the decades that followed, artists such as Juice Newton , Alabama , Hank Williams, Jr. (and, to an even greater extent, Hank Williams III ), Gary Allan , Shania Twain , Brooks & Dunn , Faith Hill , Garth Brooks , Dwight Yoakam , Steve Earle , Dolly Parton , Rosanne Cash and Linda Ronstadt moved country further towards rock influence. Neocountry[ edit ] In 1980, a style of "neocountry disco music" was popularized by the film Urban Cowboy . [105] It was during this time that a glut of pop-country crossover artists began appearing on the country charts: former pop stars Bill Medley (of the Righteous Brothers ), "England Dan" Seals (of England Dan and John Ford Coley ), Tom Jones , and Merrill Osmond (both alone and with some of his brothers ; his younger sister Marie Osmond was already an established country star) all recorded significant country hits in the early 1980s. Sales in record stores rocketed to $250 million in 1981; by 1984, 900 radio stations began programming country or neocountry pop full-time. As with most sudden trends, however, by 1984 sales had dropped below 1979 figures. [105] Truck driving country[ edit ] Main article: Truck-driving country Truck driving country music is a genre of country music [106] and is a fusion of honky-tonk , country rock and the Bakersfield sound . [107] It has the tempo of country rock and the emotion of honky-tonk, [107] and its lyrics focus on a truck driver 's lifestyle. [108] Truck driving country songs often deal with the profession of trucking and love. [107] Well-known artists who sing truck driving country include Dave Dudley , Red Sovine , Dick Curless , Red Simpson , Del Reeves , the Willis Brothers and Jerry Reed , with C. W. McCall and Cledus Maggard (pseudonyms of Bill Fries and Jay Huguely, respectively) being more humorous entries in the subgenre. [107] Dudley is known as the father of truck driving country. [108] [109] Main article: Neotraditionalist country George Strait , a pioneer of the neotraditionalist movement and dubbed the "King of Country," [110] Strait is one of the best selling musicians of all time. [110] During the mid-1980s, a group of new artists began to emerge who rejected the more polished country-pop sound that had been prominent on radio and the charts, in favor of more, traditional, "back-to-basics" production. Many of the artists during the latter half of the 1980s drew on traditional honky-tonk, bluegrass, folk and western swing. Artists who typified this sound included Travis Tritt , Reba McEntire , George Strait , Keith Whitley , Alan Jackson , John Anderson , Patty Loveless , Kathy Mattea , Randy Travis , Dwight Yoakam , Clint Black , Ricky Skaggs , and the Judds . Fifth generation (1990s)[ edit ] See also: 1990s in music § Country Country music was aided by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission 's (FCC) Docket 80–90, which led to a significant expansion of FM radio in the 1980s by adding numerous higher-fidelity FM signals to rural and suburban areas. At this point, country music was mainly heard on rural AM radio stations; the expansion of FM was particularly helpful to country music, which migrated to FM from the AM band as AM became overcome by talk radio (the country music stations that stayed on AM developed the classic country format for the AM audience). At the same time, beautiful music stations already in rural areas began abandoning the format (leading to its effective demise) to adopt country music as well. This wider availability of country music led to producers seeking to polish their product for a wider audience. In 1990, Billboard , which had published a country music chart since the 1940s, changed the methodology it used to compile the chart: singles sales were removed from the methodology, and only airplay on country radio determined a song's place on the chart. [111] In the 1990s, country music became a worldwide phenomenon thanks to Garth Brooks , [112] [113] [114] who enjoyed one of the most successful careers in popular music history, breaking records for both sales and concert attendance throughout the decade. The RIAA has certified his recordings at a combined (128× platinum ), denoting roughly 113 million U.S. shipments. [115] Other artists who experienced success during this time included Clint Black , John Michael Montgomery , Tracy Lawrence , Tim McGraw , Kenny Chesney , Travis Tritt , Alan Jackson and the newly formed duo of Brooks & Dunn ; George Strait , whose career began in the 1980s, also continued to have widespread success in this decade and beyond. Toby Keith began his career as a more pop-oriented country singer in the 1990s, evolving into an outlaw persona in the early 2000s with Pull My Chain and its follow-up, Unleashed . Success of female artists[ edit ] Female artists such as Reba McEntire , Patty Loveless , Faith Hill , Martina McBride , Deana Carter , LeAnn Rimes , Mindy McCready , Pam Tillis , Lorrie Morgan , Shania Twain , and Mary Chapin Carpenter all released platinum-selling albums in the 1990s. The Dixie Chicks became one of the most popular country bands in the 1990s and early 2000s. Their 1998 debut album Wide Open Spaces went on to become certified 12× platinum while their 1999 album Fly went on to become 10× platinum. After their third album, Home , was released in 2003, the band made political news in part because of lead singer Natalie Maines 's comments disparaging then-President George W. Bush while the band was overseas (Maines stated that she and her bandmates were ashamed to be from the same state as Bush, who had just commenced the Iraq War a few days prior). The comments caused a rift between the band and the country music scene, and the band's fourth (and most recent) album, 2006's Taking the Long Way , took a more rock-oriented direction; the album was commercially successful overall among non-country audiences but largely ignored among country audiences. After Taking the Long Way, the band broke up for a decade (with two of its members continuing as the Court Yard Hounds ) before reuniting in 2016 and releasing new material in 2020. Shania Twain performing during her Up! Tour in 2004 Canadian artist Shania Twain became the best selling female country artist of the decade. This was primarily due to the success of her breakthrough sophomore 1995 album, The Woman in Me , which was certified 12× platinum sold over 20 million copies worldwide and its follow-up, 1997's Come On Over , which was certified 20× platinum and sold over 40 million copies. The album became a major worldwide phenomenon and became one of the world's best selling albums for three years (1998, 1999 and 2000); it also went on to become the best selling country album of all time. Unlike the majority of her contemporaries, Twain enjoyed large international success that had been seen by very few country artists, before or after her. Critics have noted that Twain enjoyed much of her success due to breaking free of traditional country stereotypes and for incorporating elements of rock and pop into her music. In 2002, she released her successful fourth studio album, titled Up! , which was certified 11× platinum and sold over 15 million copies worldwide. Shania Twain has been nominated eighteen times for Grammy Awards and won five Grammys. [ [116] ] She was the best-paid country music star in 2016 according to Forbes, with a net worth of $27.5 million. [ [117] ]Twain has been credited with breaking international boundaries for country music, as well as inspiring many country artists to incorporate different genres into their music in order to attract a wider audience. She is also credited with changing the way in which many female country performers would market themselves, as unlike many before her she used fashion and her sex appeal to get rid of the stereotypical ' honky-tonk ' image the majority of country singers had in order to distinguish herself from many female country artists of the time. Line dancing revival[ edit ] In the early-mid-1990s, country western music was influenced by the popularity of line dancing . This influence was so great that Chet Atkins was quoted as saying, "The music has gotten pretty bad, I think. It's all that damn line dancing." [118] By the end of the decade, however, at least one line dance choreographer complained that good country line dance music was no longer being released. In contrast, artists such as Don Williams and George Jones who had more or less had consistent chart success through the 1970s and 1980s suddenly had their fortunes fall rapidly around 1991 when the new chart rules took effect. Main articles: Alt country and cowpunk Steve Earle performing in Ireland in 2007 Country influences combined with Punk rock and alternative rock to forge the " cowpunk " scene in Southern California during the 1980s, which included bands such as the Long Ryders , Lone Justice and the Beat Farmers , as well as the established punk group X , whose music had begun to include country and rockabilly influences. [119] Simultaneously, a generation of diverse country artists outside of California emerged that rejected the perceived cultural and musical conservatism associated with Nashville's mainstream country musicians in favor of more countercultural outlaw country and the folk singer-songwriter traditions of artists such as Woody Guthrie , Gram Parsons and Bob Dylan . Artists from outside California who were associated with early alternative country included singer-songwriters such as Lucinda Williams , Lyle Lovett and Steve Earle , the Nashville country rock band Jason and the Scorchers , the Providence " cowboy pop " band Rubber Rodeo , and the British post-punk band the Mekons . Earle, in particular, was noted for his popularity with both country and college rock audiences: He promoted his 1986 debut album Guitar Town with a tour that saw him open for both country singer Dwight Yoakam and alternative rock band the Replacements . [120] Yoakam also cultivated a fanbase spanning multiple genres through his stripped-down honky-tonk influenced sound, association with the cowpunk scene, and performances at Los Angeles punk rock clubs. [121] These early styles had coalesced into a genre by the time the Illinois group Uncle Tupelo released their influential debut album No Depression in 1990. [122] [123] The album is widely credited as being the first "alternative country" album, and inspired the name of No Depression magazine, which exclusively covered the new genre. [122] [123] Following Uncle Tupelo's disbanding in 1994, its members formed two significant bands in genre: Wilco and Son Volt . Although Wilco's sound had moved away from country and towards indie rock by the time they released their critically acclaimed album Yankee Hotel Foxtrot in 2002, they have continued to be an influence on later alt-country artists. Other acts who became prominent in the alt-country genre during the 1990s and 2000s included the Bottle Rockets , the Handsome Family , Blue Mountain , Robbie Fulks , Blood Oranges , Bright Eyes , Drive-By Truckers , Old 97's , Old Crow Medicine Show , Nickel Creek , Neko Case , and Whiskeytown , whose lead singer Ryan Adams later had a successful solo-career. [124] Alt-country, in various iterations overlapped with other genres, including Red Dirt country music ( Cross Canadian Ragweed ), jam bands ( My Morning Jacket and the String Cheese Incident ), and indie folk ( the Avett Brothers ). Despite the genre's growing popularity in the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s, alternative country and neo-traditionalist artists saw minimal support from country radio in those decades, despite strong sales and critical acclaim for albums such as the soundtrack to the 2000 film O Brother, Where Art Thou? . [125] In 1987, the Beat Farmers gained airplay on country music stations with their song "Make It Last", but the single was pulled from the format when station programmers decreed the band's music was too rock-oriented for their audience. [126] However, some alt-country songs have been crossover hits to mainstream country radio in cover versions by established artists on the format; Lucinda Williams' " Passionate Kisses " was a hit for Mary Chapin Carpenter in 1993, Ryan Adams' " When the Stars Go Blue " was a hit for Tim McGraw in 2007, and Old Crow Medicine Show's " Wagon Wheel " was a hit for Darius Rucker (member of Hootie & The Blowfish ) in 2013. In the 2010s, the alt-country genre saw an increase in its critical and commercial popularity, owing to the success of artists such as the Civil Wars , Chris Stapleton , Sturgill Simpson , Jason Isbell , Lydia Loveless and Margo Price . In 2019, Kacey Musgraves – a country artist who had gained a following with indie rock fans and music critics despite minimal airplay on country radio – won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year for her album Golden Hour . [127] Sixth generation (2000s–present)[ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2017) ( See also: 2000s in music § Country , and 2010s in music § Country The sixth generation of country music continued to be influenced by other genres such as pop, rock, and R&B. Richard Marx crossed over with his Days in Avalon album, which features five country songs and several singers and musicians. Alison Krauss sang background vocals to Marx's single "Straight from My Heart." Also, Bon Jovi had a hit single, " Who Says You Can't Go Home ", with Jennifer Nettles of Sugarland . Kid Rock 's collaboration with Sheryl Crow , " Picture ," was a major crossover hit in 2001 and began Kid Rock's transition from hard rock to a country-rock hybrid that would later produce another major crossover hit, 2008's " All Summer Long ." (Crow, whose music had often incorporated country elements, would also officially cross over into country with her hit " Easy " from her debut country album Feels like Home ). Darius Rucker , frontman for the 1990s pop-rock band Hootie & the Blowfish , began a country solo career in the late 2000s, one that to date has produced five albums and several hits on both the country charts and the Billboard Hot 100. Singer-songwriter Unknown Hinson became famous for his appearance in the Charlotte television show Wild, Wild, South, after which Hinson started his own band and toured in southern states. Other rock stars who featured a country song on their albums were Don Henley (who released Cass County in 2015, an album which featured collaborations with numerous country artists) and Poison . The back half of the 2010-2020 decade saw an increasing number of mainstream country acts collaborate with pop and R&B acts; many of these songs achieved commercial success by appealing to fans across multiple genres; examples include collaborations between Kane Brown and Marshmello [128] and Maren Morris and Zedd . [129] There has also been interest from pop singers in country music, including Beyoncé , Lady Gaga , Alicia Keys , Gwen Stefani , Justin Timberlake , Justin Bieber and Pink . [130] Supporting this movement is the new generation of contemporary pop-country, including Taylor Swift , Miranda Lambert , Carrie Underwood , Kacey Musgraves , Miley Cyrus , Billy Ray Cyrus , Sam Hunt , Chris Young , [131] who introduced new themes in their works, touching on fundamental rights, feminism, and controversies about racism and religion of the older generations. [132] Carrie Underwood at the 2019 American Music Awards In 2005, country singer Carrie Underwood rose to fame as the winner of the fourth season of American Idol and has since become one of the most prominent recording artists in the genre, with worldwide sales of more than 65 million records and seven Grammy Awards . [133] With her first single, " Inside Your Heaven ", Underwood became the only solo country artist to have a number 1 hit on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in the 2000–2009 decade and also broke Billboard chart history as the first country music artist ever to debut at No. 1 on the Hot 100. Underwood's debut album, Some Hearts , became the best-selling solo female debut album in country music history, the fastest-selling debut country album in the history of the SoundScan era and the best-selling country album of the last 10 years, being ranked by Billboard as the number 1 Country Album of the 2000–2009 decade. She has also become the female country artist with the most number one hits on the Billboard Hot Country Songs chart in the Nielsen SoundScan era (1991–present), having 14 #1s and breaking her own Guinness Book record of ten. In 2007, Underwood won the Grammy Award for Best New Artist , becoming only the second Country artist in history (and the first in a decade) to win it. She also made history by becoming the seventh woman to win Entertainer of the Year at the Academy of Country Music Awards , and the first woman in history to win the award twice, as well as twice consecutively. Time has listed Underwood as one of the 100 most influential people in the world . In 2016, Underwood topped the Country Airplay chart for the 15th time, becoming the female artist with the most number ones on that chart. Miranda Lambert in 2019 Carrie Underwood was only one of several country stars produced by a television series in the 2000s. In addition to Underwood, American Idol launched the careers of Kellie Pickler , Josh Gracin , Bucky Covington , Kristy Lee Cook , Danny Gokey , Lauren Alaina and Scotty McCreery (as well as that of occasional country singer Kelly Clarkson [134] ) in the decade, and would continue to launch country careers in the 2010s. The series Nashville Star , while not nearly as successful as Idol, did manage to bring Miranda Lambert , Kacey Musgraves and Chris Young to mainstream success, also launching the careers of lower-profile musicians such as Buddy Jewell , Sean Patrick McGraw , and Canadian musician George Canyon . Can You Duet ? produced the duos Steel Magnolia and Joey + Rory . Teen sitcoms also have influenced modern country music; in 2008, actress Jennette McCurdy (best known as the sidekick Sam on the teen sitcom iCarly ) released her first single, "So Close", following that with the single " Generation Love " in 2011. Another teen sitcom star, Miley Cyrus (of Disney Channel's Hannah Montana ), also had a crossover hit in the late 2000s with " The Climb " and another with a duet with her father, Billy Ray Cyrus , with " Ready, Set, Don't Go ." Jana Kramer , an actress in the teen drama One Tree Hill , released a country album in 2012 that has produced two hit singles as of 2013. Actresses Hayden Panettiere and Connie Britton began recording country songs as part of their roles in the TV shows Nashville and Pretty Little Liars star Lucy Hale released her debut album Road Between in 2014. Taylor Swift at the 2019 American Music Awards One of the most commercially successful country artists of the late 2000s and early 2010s has been singer-songwriter Taylor Swift . Swift first became widely known in 2006 when her debut single, " Tim McGraw ", was released when Swift was only 16 years old. In 2006, Swift released her self-titled debut studio album , which spent 275 weeks on Billboard 200 , one of the longest runs of any album on that chart. In 2008, Taylor Swift released her second studio album, Fearless , which made her the second longest number-one charted on Billboard 200 and the second best-selling album (just behind Adele 's 21 ) within the past 5 years. At the 2010 Grammys , Taylor Swift was 20 and won Album of the Year for Fearless, which made her the youngest artist to win this award. Swift has received fourteen Grammys already. Buoyed by her teen idol status among girls and a change in the methodology of compiling the Billboard charts to favor pop-crossover songs, Swift's 2012 single " We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together " spent the most weeks at the top of Billboard's Hot 100 chart and Hot Country Songs chart of any song in nearly five decades. The song's long run at the top of the chart was somewhat controversial, as the song is largely a pop song without much country influence and its success on the charts was driven by a change to the chart's criteria to include airplay on non-country radio stations, prompting disputes over what constitutes a country song; many of Swift's later releases, such as album 1989 (2014), Reputation (2017), and Lover (2019) were released solely to pop audiences. [136] [137] [138] Swift returned to country music in her recent folk-inspired releases, Folklore (2020) and Evermore (2020), with songs like " Betty " and " No Body, No Crime ". Modern variations[ edit ] Influence of rock, pop and hip-hop[ edit ] In the mid to late 2010s, country music began to increasingly sound more like the style of modern-day Pop music , [131] with more simple and repetitive lyrics, more electronic-based instrumentation, and experimentation with "talk-singing" and rap, pop-country pulled farther away from the traditional sounds of country music and received criticisms from country music purists while gaining in popularity with mainstream audiences. [139] The topics addressed have also changed, turning controversial such as acceptance of the LGBT community , safe sex, recreational marijuana use, and questioning religious sentiment. [132] Influences also come from some pop artists' interest in the country genre, including Justin Timberlake with the album Man of the Woods , [140] Beyoncé 's song " Daddy Lessons " from Lemonade , [141] Kelly Clarkson , [134] Gwen Stefani with " Nobody but You ", [142] Bruno Mars , [143] Lady Gaga , [144] Alicia Keys , [145] and Pink . [146] The influence of rock music in country has become more overt during the late 2000s and early 2010s as artists like Eric Church , Jason Aldean , and Brantley Gilbert have had success; Aaron Lewis , former frontman for the rock group Staind , had a moderately successful entry into country music in 2011 and 2012, as did Dallas Smith , former frontman of the band Default . Maren Morris success collaboration " The Middle " with EDM producer Zedd is considered one of the representations of the fusion of electro-pop with country music. [147] Florida Georgia Line whose hit song " Cruise " drew attention to the bro-country genre In the early 2010s, " bro-country ", a genre noted primarily for its themes on drinking and partying, girls, and pickup trucks became particularly popular. [156] [157] [158] Notable artists associated with this genre are Luke Bryan , Jason Aldean , Blake Shelton , Jake Owen and Florida Georgia Line whose song " Cruise " became the best-selling country song of all time. [31] [159] Research in the mid-2010s suggested that about 45 percent of country's best-selling songs could be considered bro-country, with the top two artists being Luke Bryan and Florida Georgia Line. [160] Albums by bro-country singers also sold very well—in 2013, Luke Bryan's Crash My Party was the third best-selling of all albums in the United States, with Florida Georgia Line's Here's to the Good Times at sixth, and Blake Shelton's Based on a True Story at ninth. [161] It is also thought that the popularity of bro-country helped country music to surpass classic rock as the most popular genre in the American country in 2012. [161] The genre however is controversial as it has been criticized by other country musicians and commentators over its themes and depiction of women, [162] [163] [164] opening up a divide between the older generation of country singers and the younger bro country singers that was described as "civil war" by musicians, critics, and journalists." [165] In 2014, Maddie & Tae 's " Girl in a Country Song ", addressing many of the controversial bro-country themes, peaked at number one on the Billboard Country Airplay chart. Bluegrass and Americana[ edit ] Main articles: Americana (music) and Bluegrass music Bluegrass is a genre that contain songs about going through hard times, country loving, and telling stories. It's history can be traced back to the 1600s. During this time, many people were coming to America from Ireland, Scotland and England. [166] Those people brought the first version of Bluegrass to the Americas. After several years of bluegrass' development, Bill Monroe became the "father" of bluegrass. [167] Other sources argue that The Monroe Brothers were the first stars of bluegrass. [168] Newer artists like Billy Strings , the Grascals , Molly Tuttle , Tyler Childers and the Infamous Stringdusters have been increasing the popularity of this genre, alongside some of the genres more established stars who still remain popular including Rhonda Vincent , Alison Krauss and Union Station , Ricky Skaggs and Del McCoury . The genre has developed in the Northern Kentucky and Cincinnati area. Other artists include New South (band) , Doc Watson , Osborne Brothers , and many others. Emmylou Harris in 2008 In an effort to combat the over-reliance of mainstream country music on pop-infused artists, the sister genre of Americana began to gain popularity and increase in prominence, receiving eight Grammy categories of its own in 2009. Though Americana music gained popularity in 2009, the first Americana singer was likely Hank Williams in the 1950s. [169] Americana music incorporates elements of country music, bluegrass, folk, blues, gospel, rhythm and blues, roots rock and southern soul and is overseen by the Americana Music Association and the Americana Music Honors & Awards . [170] As a result of an increasingly pop-leaning mainstream, many more traditional-sounding artists such as Tyler Childers , Zach Bryan and Old Crow Medicine Show began to associate themselves more with Americana and the alternative country scene where their sound was more celebrated. Similarly, many established country acts who no longer received commercial airplay, including Emmylou Harris and Lyle Lovett , began to flourish again. [171] Contemporary country and western revival[ edit ] Kacey Musgraves became one of the most controversial figures in contemporary country music. [172] During the mid-1980s, a group of new artists began to emerge who rejected the more polished country-pop sound that had been prominent on radio and the charts, in favor of more, traditional, "back-to-basics" production. Many of the artists during the latter half of the 1980s drew on traditional honky-tonk, bluegrass, folk and western swing. Artists who typified this sound included Travis Tritt , Reba McEntire , George Strait , Keith Whitley , Alan Jackson , John Anderson , Patty Loveless , Kathy Mattea , Randy Travis , Dwight Yoakam , Clint Black , Ricky Skaggs , and the Judds . Beginning in 1989, a confluence of events brought an unprecedented commercial boom to country music. New marketing strategies were used to engage fans, powered by technology that more accurately tracked the popularity of country music, and boosted by a political and economic climate that focused attention on the genre. Garth Brooks ("Friends in Low Places") in particular attracted fans with his fusion of neotraditionalist country and stadium rock . Other artists such as Brooks and Dunn ("Boot Scootin' Boogie") also combined conventional country with slick, rock elements, while Lorrie Morgan , Mary Chapin Carpenter , and Kathy Mattea updated neotraditionalist styles. [173] Roots of conservative country was Lee Greenwood's "God Bless the USA". [174] The September 11 attacks of 2001 and the economic recession helped move country music back into the spotlight. Many country artists, such as Alan Jackson with his ballad on terrorist attacks, " Where Were You (When the World Stopped Turning) ", wrote songs that celebrated the military, highlighted the gospel, and emphasized home and family values over wealth. Alt-Country singer Ryan Adams song " New York, New York " pays tribute to New York City, and its popular music video (which was shot 4 days before the attacks) shows Adams playing in front of the Manhattan skyline, Along with several shots of the city. In contrast, more rock-oriented country singers took more direct aim at the attacks' perpetrators; Toby Keith's " Courtesy of the Red, White and Blue (The Angry American) " threatened to "a boot in" the posterior of the enemy, while Charlie Daniels's " This Ain't No Rag, It's a Flag " promised to "hunt" the perpetrators "down like a mad dog hound." These songs gained such recognition that it put country music back into popular culture. [175] Darryl Worley recorded "Have You Forgotten" also. There have been numerous patriotic country songs throughout the years. [176] [177] Some modern artists that primarily or entirely produce country pop music include Kacey Musgraves , Maren Morris , Kelsea Ballerini , Sam Hunt , Kane Brown , Chris Lane , and Dan + Shay . [178] The singers who are part of this country movement are also defined as "Nashville's new generation of country". [179] Although the changes made by the new generation, it has been recognized by major music awards associations and successes in Billboard and international charts. Golden Hour by Kacey Musgraves won album of the year at 61st Annual Grammy Awards , Academy of Country Music Awards , Country Music Association Awards , [180] although it has received criticism from some traditional country music fans. [181] Midland , one of the most popular neotraditional honky-tonk bands Olivia Newton-John singing in Sydney in 2008 Australian country music has a long tradition. Influenced by US country music, it has developed a distinct style, shaped by British and Irish folk ballads and Australian bush balladeers like Henry Lawson and Banjo Paterson . Country instruments, including the guitar, banjo , fiddle and harmonica, create the distinctive sound of country music in Australia and accompany songs with strong storyline and memorable chorus. Folk songs sung in Australia between the 1780s and 1920s, based around such themes as the struggle against government tyranny , or the lives of bushrangers , swagmen , drovers , stockmen and shearers , continue to influence the genre. This strain of Australian country, with lyrics focusing on Australian subjects, is generally known as "bush music" or " bush band music". " Waltzing Matilda ", often regarded as Australia's unofficial national anthem , is a quintessential Australian country song, influenced more by British and Irish folk ballads than by US country and western music. The lyrics were composed by the poet Banjo Paterson in 1895. Other popular songs from this tradition include " The Wild Colonial Boy ", " Click Go the Shears ", "The Queensland Drover" and "The Dying Stockman". Later themes which endure to the present include the experiences of war, of droughts and flooding rains, of Aboriginality and of the railways and trucking routes which link Australia's vast distances. [182] [183] Pioneers of a more Americanised popular country music in Australia included Tex Morton (known as "The Father of Australian Country Music") in the 1930s. Author Andrew Smith delivers a through research and engaged view of Tex Morton's life and his impact on the country music scene in Australia in the 1930s and 1940s. Other early stars included Buddy Williams , Shirley Thoms and Smoky Dawson . Buddy Williams (1918–1986) was the first Australian-born to record country music in Australia in the late 1930s and was the pioneer of a distinctly Australian style of country music called the bush ballad that others such as Slim Dusty would make popular in later years. During the Second World War, many of Buddy Williams recording sessions were done whilst on leave from the Army. At the end of the war, Williams would go on to operate some of the largest travelling tent rodeo shows Australia has ever seen. In 1952, Dawson began a radio show and went on to national stardom as a singing cowboy of radio, TV and film. Slim Dusty (1927–2003) was known as the "King of Australian Country Music" and helped to popularise the Australian bush ballad . His successful career spanned almost six decades, and his 1957 hit " A Pub with No Beer " was the biggest-selling record by an Australian to that time, and with over seven million record sales in Australia he is the most successful artist in Australian musical history. [184] Dusty recorded and released his one-hundredth album in the year 2000 and was given the honour of singing " Waltzing Matilda " in the closing ceremony of the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games . Dusty's wife Joy McKean penned several of his most popular songs. Chad Morgan , who began recording in the 1950s, has represented a vaudeville style of comic Australian country; Frank Ifield achieved considerable success in the early 1960s, especially in the UK Singles Charts and Reg Lindsay was one of the first Australians to perform at Nashville's Grand Ole Opry in 1974. [185] Eric Bogle 's 1972 folk lament to the Gallipoli Campaign " And the Band Played Waltzing Matilda " recalled the British and Irish origins of Australian folk-country. Singer-songwriter Paul Kelly , whose music style straddles folk, rock and country, is often described as the poet laureate of Australian music. [186] By the 1990s, country music had attained crossover success in the pop charts, with artists like James Blundell and James Reyne singing " Way Out West ", and country star Kasey Chambers winning the ARIA Award for Best Female Artist in three years (2000, 2002 and 2004), tying with pop stars Wendy Matthews and Sia for the most wins in that category. Furthermore, Chambers has gone on to win nine ARIA Awards for Best Country Album and, in 2018, became the youngest artist to ever be inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame . The crossover influence of Australian country is also evident in the music of successful contemporary bands the Waifs and the John Butler Trio . Nick Cave has been heavily influenced by the country artist Johnny Cash . In 2000, Cash, covered Cave's " The Mercy Seat " on the album American III: Solitary Man , seemingly repaying Cave for the compliment he paid by covering Cash's "The Singer" (originally " The Folk Singer ") on his Kicking Against the Pricks album. Subsequently, Cave cut a duet with Cash on a version of Hank Williams ' " I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry " for Cash's American IV: The Man Comes Around album (2002). [187] Popular contemporary performers of Australian country music include John Williamson (who wrote the iconic " True Blue "), Lee Kernaghan (whose hits include "Boys from the Bush" and " The Outback Club "), Gina Jeffreys , Forever Road and Sara Storer . In the U.S., Olivia Newton-John , Sherrié Austin and Keith Urban have attained great success. During her time as a country singer in the 1970s, Newton-John became the first (and to date only) non-US winner of the Country Music Association Award for Female Vocalist of the Year which many considered a controversial decision by the CMA; after starring in the rock-and-roll musical film Grease in 1978, Newton-John (mirroring the character she played in the film) shifted to pop music in the 1980s. Urban is arguably considered the most successful international Australian country star, winning nine CMA Awards, including three Male Vocalist of the Year wins and two wins of the CMA's top honour Entertainer of the Year . Pop star Kylie Minogue found success with her 2018 country pop album Golden which she recorded in Nashville reaching number one in Scotland, the UK and her native Australia. Country music has been a particularly popular form of musical expression among Indigenous Australians . Troy Cassar-Daley is among Australia's successful contemporary indigenous performers, and Kev Carmody and Archie Roach employ a combination of folk-rock and country music to sing about Aboriginal rights issues. [188] The Tamworth Country Music Festival began in 1973 and now attracts up to 100,000 visitors annually. Held in Tamworth, New South Wales (country music capital of Australia), it celebrates the culture and heritage of Australian country music. During the festival the CMAA holds the Country Music Awards of Australia ceremony awarding the Golden Guitar trophies.  Other significant country music festivals include the Whittlesea Country Music Festival (near Melbourne ) and the Mildura Country Music Festival for "independent" performers during October, and the Canberra Country Music Festival held in the national capital during November. Country HQ showcases new talent on the rise in the country music scene down under . CMC (the Country Music Channel ), a 24‑hour music channel dedicated to non-stop country music, can be viewed on pay TV and features once a year the Golden Guitar Awards, CMAs and CCMAs alongside international shows such as The Wilkinsons, The Road Hammers, and Country Music Across America. Main articles: Canadian country music , Canadian Country Music Association , and Canadian Country Music Hall of Fame Shania Twain in 2011 Outside of the United States, Canada has the largest country music fan and artist base, something that is to be expected given the two countries' proximity and cultural parallels. Mainstream country music is culturally ingrained in the prairie provinces , the British Columbia Interior , Northern Ontario, and in Atlantic Canada . [189] Celtic traditional music developed in Atlantic Canada in the form of Scottish, Acadian and Irish folk music popular amongst Irish, French and Scottish immigrants to Canada's Atlantic Provinces ( Newfoundland , Nova Scotia , New Brunswick , and Prince Edward Island ). [189] Like the southern United States and Appalachia , all four regions are of heavy British Isles stock and rural; as such, the development of traditional music in the Maritimes somewhat mirrored the development of country music in the US South and Appalachia. Country and western music never really developed separately in Canada; however, after its introduction to Canada, following the spread of radio, it developed quite quickly out of the Atlantic Canadian traditional scene. While true Atlantic Canadian traditional music is very Celtic or " sea shanty " in nature, even today, the lines have often been blurred. Certain areas often are viewed as embracing one strain or the other more openly. For example, in Newfoundland the traditional music remains unique and Irish in nature, whereas traditional musicians in other parts of the region may play both genres interchangeably. Don Messer's Jubilee was a Halifax, Nova Scotia -based country/folk variety television show that was broadcast nationally from 1957 to 1969. In Canada it out-performed The Ed Sullivan Show broadcast from the United States and became the top-rated television show throughout much of the 1960s. Don Messer's Jubilee followed a consistent format throughout its years, beginning with a tune named "Goin' to the Barndance Tonight", followed by fiddle tunes by Messer, songs from some of his "Islanders" including singers Marg Osburne and Charlie Chamberlain , the featured guest performance, and a closing hymn. It ended with " Till We Meet Again ". The guest performance slot gave national exposure to numerous Canadian folk musicians, including Stompin' Tom Connors and Catherine McKinnon . Some Maritime country performers went on to further fame beyond Canada. Hank Snow , Wilf Carter (also known as Montana Slim), and Anne Murray are the three most notable. The cancellation of the show by the public broadcaster in 1969 caused a nationwide protest, including the raising of questions in the Parliament of Canada. The Prairie provinces, due to their western cowboy and agrarian nature, are the true heartland of Canadian country music. [189] While the Prairies never developed a traditional music culture anything like the Maritimes, the folk music of the Prairies often reflected the cultural origins of the settlers, who were a mix of Scottish , Ukrainian , German and others. For these reasons polkas and western music were always popular in the region, and with the introduction of the radio, mainstream country music flourished. As the culture of the region is western and frontier in nature, the specific genre of country and western is more popular today in the Prairies than in any other part of the country. No other area of the country embraces all aspects of the culture, from two-step dancing, to the cowboy dress, to rodeos, to the music itself, like the Prairies do. The Atlantic Provinces, on the other hand, produce far more traditional musicians, but they are not usually specifically country in nature, usually bordering more on the folk or Celtic genres. [189] Canadian country pop star Shania Twain is the best-selling female country artist of all time and one of the best-selling artists of all time in any genre. [190] [191] Furthermore, she is the only woman to have three consecutive albums be certified Diamond . Mexico and Latin America[ edit ] Lorenzo Antonio Country music artists from the U.S. have seen crossover with Latin American audiences, particularly in Mexico . Country music artists from throughout the U.S. have recorded renditions of Mexican folk songs, including " El Rey " which was performed on George Strait 's Twang album and during Al Hurricane 's tribute concert . American Latin pop crossover musicians, like Lorenzo Antonio 's "Ranchera Jam" have also combined Mexican songs with country songs in a New Mexico music style.[ citation needed ] While Tejano and New Mexico music is typically thought of as being Spanish language, the genres have also had charting musicians focused on English language music. [192] During the 1970s, singer-songwriter Freddy Fender had two #1 country music singles, that were popular throughout North America , with " Before the Next Teardrop Falls " and " Wasted Days and Wasted Nights ". [193] Notable songs which have been influenced by Hispanic and Latin culture as performed by US country music artists include Marty Robbins ' " El Paso " trilogy, Willie Nelson and Merle Haggard covering the Townes Van Zandt song " Pancho and Lefty ", " Toes " by Zac Brown Band , and " Sangria " by Blake Shelton .[ citation needed ] Regional Mexican is a radio format featuring many of Mexico 's versions of country music. It includes a number of different styles, usually named after their region of origin. One specific song style, the Canción Ranchera , or simply Ranchera, literally meaning " ranch song", found its origins in the Mexican countryside and was first popularized with Mariachi . It has since also become popular with Grupero , Banda , Norteño , Tierra Caliente , Duranguense and other regional Mexican styles. The Corrido , a different song style with a similar history, is also performed in many other regional styles, and is most related to the western style of the United States and Canada. Other song styles performed in regional Mexican music include Ballads , Cumbias , Boleros , among others. Country en Español (Country in Spanish) is also popular in Mexico. Some Mexican artists began performing country songs in Spanish during the 1970s, and the genre became prominent mainly in the northern regions of the country during the 1980s. A Country en Español popularity boom also reached the central regions of Mexico during the 1990s. For most of its history, Country en Español mainly resembled Neotraditional country . However, in more modern times, some artists have incorporated influences from other country music subgenres. In Brazil , there is Música Sertaneja , the most popular music genre in that country. It originated in the countryside of São Paulo state in the 1910s, before the development of U.S. country music. In Argentina , on the last weekend of September, the yearly San Pedro Country Music Festival [194] [ better source needed ] takes place in the town of San Pedro, Buenos Aires . The festival features bands from different places in Argentina , as well as international artists from Brazil, Uruguay , Chile , Peru and the U.S. United Kingdom[ edit ] Country music is popular in the United Kingdom, although somewhat less so than in other English-speaking countries. There are some British country music acts and publications. Although radio stations devoted to country are among the most popular in other Anglophone nations, none of the top ten most-listened-to stations in the UK are country stations, and national broadcaster BBC Radio does not offer a full-time country station ( BBC Radio 2 Country , a "pop-up" station, operated four days each year between 2015 and 2017). The BBC does offer a country show on BBC Radio 2 each week hosted by Bob Harris . [195] The most successful British country music act of the 21st century are Ward Thomas and the Shires . In 2015, the Shires' album Brave , became the first UK country act ever to chart in the Top 10 of the UK Albums Chart and they became the first UK country act to receive an award from the American Country Music Association . [196] In 2016, Ward Thomas then became the first UK country act to hit number 1 in the UK Albums Chart with their album Cartwheels . [197] There is the C2C: Country to Country festival held every year, and for many years there was a festival at Wembley Arena , which was broadcast on the BBC , the International Festivals of Country Music, promoted by Mervyn Conn , held at the venue between 1969 and 1991. The shows were later taken into Europe, and featured such stars as Johnny Cash , Dolly Parton , Tammy Wynette , David Allan Coe , Emmylou Harris , Boxcar Willie , Johnny Russell and Jerry Lee Lewis . A handful of country musicians had even greater success in mainstream British music than they did in the U.S., despite a certain amount of disdain from the music press. Britain's largest music festival Glastonbury has featured major US country acts in recent years, such as Kenny Rogers in 2013 and Dolly Parton in 2014. [198] Engelbert Humperdinck had hits with country songs Before pop stardom, Bonnie Tyler had a country hit with " It's a Heartache " From within the UK, few country musicians achieved widespread mainstream success. Many British singers who performed the occasional country songs are of other genres. Tom Jones , by this point near the end of his peak success as a pop singer, had a string of country hits in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The Bee Gees had some fleeting success in the genre, with one country hit as artists (" Rest Your Love on Me ") and a major hit as songwriters (" Islands in the Stream "); Barry Gibb , the band's usual lead singer and last surviving member, acknowledged that country music was a major influence on the band's style. [199] Singer Engelbert Humperdinck , while charting only once in the U.S. country top 40 with " After the Lovin' ", achieved widespread success on both the U.S. and British pop charts with his covers of Nashville country ballads such as " Release Me ", " Am I That Easy to Forget " and " There Goes My Everything ". Welsh singer Bonnie Tyler initially started her career making country records, and in 1978 her single " It's a Heartache " reached number four on the UK Singles Chart . In 2013, Tyler returned to her roots, blending the country elements of her early work with the rock of her successful material on her album Rocks and Honey which featured a duet with Vince Gill . The songwriting tandem of Roger Cook and Roger Greenaway wrote a number of country hits, in addition to their widespread success in pop songwriting; Cook is notable for being the only Briton to be inducted into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame . A niche country subgenre popular in the West Country is Scrumpy and Western , which consists mostly of novelty songs and comedy music recorded there (its name comes from scrumpy , an alcoholic beverage). A primarily local interest, the largest Scrumpy and Western hit in the UK and Ireland was " The Combine Harvester ", which pioneered the genre and reached number one in both the UK and Ireland; Fred Wedlock had a number-six hit in 1981 with "The Oldest Swinger in Town". In 1975, comedian Billy Connolly topped the UK Singles Chart with " D.I.V.O.R.C.E. ", a parody of the Tammy Wynette song " D-I-V-O-R-C-E ". [200] The British Country Music Festival is an annual three-day festival held in the seaside resort of Blackpool . It uniquely promotes artists from the United Kingdom and Ireland to celebrate the impact that Celtic and British settlers to America had on the origins of country music. Past headline artists have included Amy Wadge , Ward Thomas , Tom Odell , Nathan Carter , Lisa McHugh , Catherine McGrath , Wildwood Kin , The Wandering Hearts and Henry Priestman . [201] Main article: Country and Irish In Ireland , Country and Irish is a music genre that combines traditional Irish folk music with US country music. Television channel TG4 began a quest for Ireland's next country star called Glór Tíre , translated as "Country Voice". It is now in its sixth season and is one of TG4's most-watched TV shows. Over the past ten years, country and gospel recording artist James Kilbane has reached multi-platinum success with his mix of Christian and traditional country influenced albums. James Kilbane like many other Irish artists is today working closer with Nashville. Daniel O'Donnell achieved international success with his brand of music crossing country, Irish folk and European easy listening , earning a strong following among older women [202] both in the British Isles and in North America. A recent success in the Irish arena has been Crystal Swing . Japan and Asia[ edit ] Charlie Nagatani performing at the Grand Ole Opry In Japan , there are forms of J-country and J-western similar to other J-pop movements, J-hip hop and J-rock . [203] [204] One of the first J-western musicians was Biji Kuroda & The Chuck Wagon Boys, other vintage artists included Jimmie Tokita and His Mountain Playboys, The Blue Rangers, Wagon Aces, and Tomi Fujiyama . [203] J-country continues to have a dedicated following in Japan, thanks to Charlie Nagatani, Katsuoshi Suga, J.T. Kanehira, Dicky Kitano, and Manami Sekiya. [203] Country and western venues in Japan include the former annual Country Gold which were put together by Charlie Nagatani, and the modern honky tonks at Little Texas in Tokyo and Armadillo in Nagoya . [205] [206] [207] In India , there is an annual concert festival called "Blazing Guitars" [208] held in Chennai brings together Anglo-Indian musicians from all over the country (including some who have emigrated to places like Australia). The year 2003 brought home-grown Indian, Bobby Cash to the forefront of the country music culture in India when he became India's first international country music artist to chart singles in Australia. In the Philippines , country music has found their way into Cordilleran way of life, which often compares the Igorot lifestyle to that of US cowboys. Baguio City has an FM station that caters to country music, DZWR 99.9 Country, which is part of the Catholic Media Network . Bombo Radyo Baguio has a segment on its Sunday slot for Igorot, Ilocano and country music. And as of recently, DWUB occasionally plays country music. Many country music musicians tour the Philippines . Original Pinoy Music has influences from country. Other international country music[ edit ] Tom Roland, from the Country Music Association International, explains country music's global popularity: "In this respect, at least, Country Music listeners around the globe have something in common with those in the United States. In Germany, for instance, Rohrbach identifies three general groups that gravitate to the genre: people intrigued with the US cowboy icon, middle-aged fans who seek an alternative to harder rock music and younger listeners drawn to the pop-influenced sound that underscores many current Country hits." [209] One of the first US people to perform country music abroad was George Hamilton IV . He was the first country musician to perform in the Soviet Union ; he also toured in Australia and the Middle East. He was deemed the "International Ambassador of Country Music" for his contributions to the globalization of country music. [210] Johnny Cash, Emmylou Harris, Keith Urban, and Dwight Yoakam have also made numerous international tours. [209] The Country Music Association undertakes various initiatives to promote country music internationally. [209] Middle East[ edit ] In Iran , country music has appeared in recent years. According to Melody Music Magazine, the pioneer of country music in Iran is the English-speaking country music band Dream Rovers , whose founder, singer and songwriter is Erfan Rezayatbakhsh (elf). [211] The band was formed in 2007 in Tehran , [212] and during this time they have been trying to introduce and popularize country music in Iran by releasing two studio albums [213] and performing live at concerts, despite the difficulties that the Islamic regime in Iran makes for bands that are active in the western music field. [214] Musician Toby Keith performed alongside Saudi Arabian folk musician Rabeh Sager in 2017. [215] [216] This concert was similar to the performances of Jazz ambassadors that performed distinctively American style music internationally. [217]
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of music This article is about a specific music genre. For popular music in general, see Popular music . For other uses, see Pop music (disambiguation) . "Pop song" redirects here. For other uses, see Pop Song . Pop music Mid-1950s, [4] United States and United Kingdom Derivative forms rock music Pop music is a type of popular music that originated in its modern form during the mid-1950s in the United States and the United Kingdom. [4] During the 1950s and 1960s, pop music encompassed rock and roll and the youth-oriented styles it influenced. Rock and pop music remained roughly synonymous until the late 1960s, after which pop became associated with music that was more commercial, ephemeral, and accessible. Identifying factors of pop music usually include repeated choruses and hooks , short to medium-length songs written in a basic format (often the verse–chorus structure ), and rhythms or tempos that can be easily danced to. Much of pop music also borrows elements from other styles such as rock, urban , dance , Latin , and country . The terms popular music and pop music are often used interchangeably, although the former more accurately describes all music that is popular and includes many disparate styles. Although much of the music that appears on record charts is considered to be pop music, the genre is distinguished from chart music. Definitions and etymology[ edit ] David Hatch and Stephen Millward describe pop music as "a body of music which is distinguishable from popular, jazz, and folk music". [9] According to Pete Seeger , pop music is "professional music which draws upon both folk music and fine arts music". [3] David Boyle, a music researcher, states pop music as any type of music that a person has been exposed to by the mass media. [10] Most individuals think that pop music is just the singles charts and not the sum of all chart music. The music charts contain songs from a variety of sources, including classical , jazz , rock , and novelty songs . As a genre, pop music is seen to exist and develop separately. [11] Therefore, the term "pop music" may be used to describe a distinct genre, designed to appeal to all, often characterized as "instant singles-based music aimed at teenagers" in contrast to rock music as "album-based music for adults". [4] [13] Pop music continuously evolves along with the term's definition. According to music writer Bill Lamb, popular music is defined as "the music since industrialization in the 1800s that is most in line with the tastes and interests of the urban middle class." [14] The term "pop song" was first used in 1926, in the sense of a piece of music "having popular appeal". [15] Hatch and Millward indicate that many events in the history of recording in the 1920s can be seen as the birth of the modern pop music industry, including in country , blues , and hillbilly music . [16] The Oxford Dictionary of Music states that the term "pop" refers to music performed by such artists as the Rolling Stones (pictured here in a 2006 performance). According to the website of The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , the term "pop music" "originated in Britain in the mid-1950s as a description for rock and roll and the new youth music styles that it influenced". [2] The Oxford Dictionary of Music states that while pop's "earlier meaning meant concerts appealing to a wide audience [...] since the late 1950s, however, pop has had the special meaning of non-classical mus[ic], usually in the form of songs, performed by such artists as The Beatles , The Rolling Stones , ABBA , etc." [17] Grove Music Online also states that "[...] in the early 1960s, [the term] 'pop music' competed terminologically with beat music [in England], while in the US its coverage overlapped (as it still does) with that of 'rock and roll'". [2] From about 1967, the term "pop music" was increasingly used in opposition to the term rock music, a division that gave generic significance to both terms. [18] While rock aspired to authenticity and an expansion of the possibilities of popular music, [18] pop was more commercial, ephemeral, and accessible. [19] According to British musicologist Simon Frith , pop music is produced "as a matter of enterprise not art", and is "designed to appeal to everyone" but "doesn't come from any particular place or mark off any particular taste". Frith adds that it is "not driven by any significant ambition except profit and commercial reward [...] and, in musical terms, it is essentially conservative". It is, "provided from on high (by record companies, radio programmers, and concert promoters) rather than being made from below (...) Pop is not a do-it-yourself music but is professionally produced and packaged". [4] As of 2011 [update] , " You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin' " ranks as the most frequently played song in US radio history. [20] It is described by music writers Nick Logan and Bob Woffinden as "the ultimate pop record". [21] Problems playing this file? See media help . According to Frith, characteristics of pop music include an aim of appealing to a general audience, rather than to a particular sub-culture or ideology, and an emphasis on craftsmanship rather than formal "artistic" qualities. [4] Besides, Frith also offers three identifying characteristics of pop music: light entertainment, commercial imperatives, and personal identification. Pop music grew out of a light entertainment and easy listening tradition. [22] Pop music is more conservative than other music genres such as folk, blues, country, and tradition. Many pop songs do not contain themes of resistance, opposition, or political themes, rather focusing more on love and relationships.  Therefore, pop music does not challenge its audiences socially, and does not cause political activism. Frith also said the main purpose of pop music is to create revenue. It is not a medium of free articulation of the people. Instead, pop music seeks to supply the nature of personal desire and achieve the instant empathy with cliche personalities, stereotypes, and melodrama that appeals to listeners. It is mostly about how much revenue pop music makes for record companies. [23] Music scholar Timothy Warner said pop music typically has an emphasis on recording, production, and technology, rather than live performance; a tendency to reflect existing trends rather than progressive developments ; and seeks to encourage dancing or uses dance-oriented rhythms. [19] Amr Diab , Egyptian pop star, named "El-Hadaba", for achieving high records sales in the Middle East and Africa for the last three decades [24] [25] The main medium of pop music is the song, often between two and a half and three and a half minutes in length, generally marked by a consistent and noticeable rhythmic element , a mainstream style and a simple traditional structure . [26] The structure of many popular songs is that of a verse and a chorus, the chorus serving as the portion of the track that is designed to stick in the ear through simple repetition both musically and lyrically. The chorus is often where the music builds towards and is often preceded by "the drop" where the bass and drum parts "drop out". [27] Common variants include the verse-chorus form and the thirty-two-bar form , with a focus on melodies and catchy hooks , and a chorus that contrasts melodically, rhythmically and harmonically with the verse . [28] The beat and the melodies tend to be simple, with limited harmonic accompaniment. [29] The lyrics of modern pop songs typically focus on simple themes – often love and romantic relationships – although there are notable exceptions. [4] Harmony and chord progressions in pop music are often "that of classical European tonality , only more simple-minded." [30] Clichés include the barbershop quartet-style harmony (i.e. ii – V – I) and blues scale -influenced harmony. [31] There was a lessening of the influence of traditional views of the circle of fifths between the mid-1950s and the late 1970s, including less predominance for the dominant function . [32] In October 2023, Billboard compiled a list of "the 500 best pop songs". In doing so, they noted the difficulty of defining "pop songs": One of the reasons pop can be hard to summarize is because there’s no real sonic or musical definition to it. There are common elements to a lot of the biggest pop songs, but at the end of the day, "pop" means "popular" first and foremost, and just about any song that becomes popular enough...can be considered a pop song. [33] Development and influence[ edit ] Technology and media[ edit ] Bing Crosby was one of the first artists to be nicknamed "King of Pop" or "King of Popular Music". [34] [ verification needed ] In the 1940s, improved microphone design allowed a more intimate singing style and, ten or twenty years later, inexpensive and more durable 45 rpm records for singles "revolutionized the manner in which pop has been disseminated", which helped to move pop music to "a record/radio/film star system". [35] Another technological change was the widespread availability of television in the 1950s with televised performances, which meant that "pop stars had to have a visual presence". [35] In the 1960s, the introduction of inexpensive, portable transistor radios meant that teenagers in the developed world could listen to music outside of the home. [35] By the early 1980s, the promotion of pop music had been greatly affected by the rise of music television channels like MTV , which "favoured those artists such as Michael Jackson and Madonna who had a strong visual appeal". [35] Multi-track recording (from the 1960s) and digital sampling (from the 1980s) have also been used as methods for the creation and elaboration of pop music. [4] During the mid-1960s, pop music made repeated forays into new sounds, styles, and techniques that inspired public discourse among its listeners. The word "progressive" was frequently used, and it was thought that every song and single was to be a "progression" from the last. [36] Music critic Simon Reynolds writes that beginning with 1967, a divide would exist between "progressive" pop and "mass/chart" pop, a separation which was "also, broadly, one between boys and girls, middle-class and working-class." [37] The latter half of the 20th century included a large-scale trend in American culture in which the boundaries between art and pop music were increasingly blurred. [38] Between 1950 and 1970, there was a debate of pop versus art. [39] Since then, certain music publications have embraced the music's legitimacy, a trend referred to as " poptimism ". [39] Stylistic evolution[ edit ] The 1960s British Invasion marked a period when the US charts were inundated with British acts such as the Beatles (pictured 1964). Throughout its development, pop music has absorbed influences from other genres of popular music. Early pop music drew on traditional pop , an American counterpart to German Schlager and French Chanson , however compared to the pop of European countries, traditional pop originally emphasized influences ranging from Tin Pan Alley songwriting, Broadway theatre , and show tunes . As the genre evolved more influences ranging from classical , folk , rock , country , electronic music , and other popular genres became more prominent. In 2016, a Scientific Reports study that examined over 464,000 recordings of popular music recorded between 1955 and 2010 found that, compared to 1960s pop music, contemporary pop music uses a smaller variety of pitch progressions, greater average volume, [40] less diverse instrumentation and recording techniques, and less timbral variety. [41] Scientific American 's John Matson reported that this "seems to support the popular anecdotal observation that pop music of yore was "better", or at least more varied, than today's top-40 stuff". However, he also noted that the study may not have been entirely representative of pop in each generation. [41] In the 1960s,  the majority of mainstream pop music fell in two categories: guitar, drum and bass groups or singers backed by a traditional orchestra. [42] Since early in the decade, it was common for pop producers, songwriters, and engineers to freely experiment with musical form, orchestration , unnatural reverb , and other sound effects. Some of the best known examples are Phil Spector 's Wall of Sound and Joe Meek 's use of homemade electronic sound effects for acts like the Tornados . [43] At the same time, pop music on radio and in both American and British film moved away from refined Tin Pan Alley to more eccentric songwriting and incorporated reverb-drenched electric guitar, symphonic strings, and horns played by groups of properly arranged and rehearsed studio musicians. [44] A 2019 study held by New York University in which 643 participants had to rank how familiar a pop song is to them, songs from the 1960s turned out to be the most memorable, significantly more than songs from recent years 2000 to 2015. [45] Before the progressive pop of the late 1960s, performers were typically unable to decide on the artistic content of their music. [46] Assisted by the mid-1960s economic boom, record labels began investing in artists, giving them the freedom to experiment, and offering them limited control over their content and marketing. [47] This situation declined after the late 1970s and would not reemerge until the rise of Internet stars. [47] Indie pop , which developed in the late 1970s, marked another departure from the glamour of contemporary pop music, with guitar bands formed on the then-novel premise that one could record and release their own music without having to procure a record contract from a major label. [48] The 1980s are commonly remembered for an increase in the use of digital recording , associated with the usage of synthesizers , with synth-pop music and other electronic genres featuring non-traditional instruments increasing in popularity. [49] By 2014, pop music worldwide had been permeated by electronic dance music . [50] In 2018, researchers at the University of California, Irvine , concluded that pop music has become 'sadder' since the 1980s. The elements of happiness and brightness have eventually been replaced with electronic beats making pop music more 'sad yet danceable'. [51] International spread and crosspollination[ edit ] Michael Jackson (left) and Madonna (right) have been dubbed respectively as the " King and Queen of Pop " since the 1980s. [52] Pop music has been dominated by the American and (from the mid-1960s) British music industries , whose influence has made pop music something of an international monoculture, but most regions and countries have their own form of pop music, sometimes producing local versions of wider trends, and lending them local characteristics. [53] Some of these trends (for example Europop ) have had a significant impact on the development of the genre. [54] The story of pop music is largely the story of the intertwining pop culture of the United States and the United Kingdom in the postwar era. — Bob Stanley [50] Vocally, Whitney Houston is one of the world's most influential pop vocalists since the 1980s and has been referred to as '' The Voice '' for her vocal talent. [55] [56] According to Grove Music Online, "Western-derived pop styles, whether coexisting with or marginalizing distinctively local genres, have spread throughout the world and have come to constitute stylistic common denominators in global commercial music cultures". [57] Some non-Western countries, such as Japan, have developed a thriving pop music industry, most of which is devoted to Western-style pop. Japan has for several years produced a greater quantity of music than everywhere except the US.[ clarification needed ] [57] The spread of Western-style pop music has been interpreted variously as representing processes of Americanization, homogenization , modernization, creative appropriation, cultural imperialism , or a more general process of globalization . [57] One of the pop music styles that developed alongside other music styles is Latin pop , which rose in popularity in the US during the 1950s with early rock and roll success Ritchie Valens . [58] Later, Los Lobos and Chicano rock gained in popularity during the 1970s and 1980s, and musician Selena saw large-scale popularity in the 1980s and 1990s, along with crossover appeal with fans of Tejano musicians Lydia Mendoza and Little Joe .[ citation needed ] With later Hispanic and Latino Americans seeing success within pop music charts, 1990s pop successes stayed popular in both their original genres and in broader pop music. [59] Latin pop hit singles, such as " Macarena " by Los del Río and " Despacito " by Luis Fonsi , have seen record-breaking success on worldwide pop music charts. [60]
Toggle the table of contents Rock music From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Broad genre of popular music For the original 1950s style of rock music, see Rock and roll . For other uses, see Rock music (disambiguation) . Rock 1950s and 1960s, US and UK Typical instruments 2024 in rock music Rock is a broad genre of popular music that originated as " rock and roll " in the United States in the late 1940s and early 1950s, developing into a range of different styles from the mid-1960s, particularly in the United States and the United Kingdom. [3] It has its roots in 1940s and 1950s rock and roll, a style that drew directly from the blues and rhythm and blues genres of African-American music and from country music . Rock also drew strongly from genres such as electric blues and folk , and incorporated influences from jazz and other musical styles. For instrumentation, rock has centered on the electric guitar , usually as part of a rock group with electric bass guitar , drums , and one or more singers. Usually, rock is song-based music with a 44 time signature using a verse–chorus form , but the genre has become extremely diverse. Like pop music , lyrics often stress romantic love but also address a wide variety of other themes that are frequently social or political. Rock was the most popular genre of music in the U.S. and much of the Western world from the 1950s to the 2010s. Rock musicians in the mid-1960s began to advance the album ahead of the single as the dominant form of recorded music expression and consumption, with the Beatles at the forefront of this development. Their contributions lent the genre a cultural legitimacy in the mainstream and initiated a rock-informed album era in the music industry for the next several decades. By the late 1960s " classic rock " [3] period, a number of distinct rock music subgenres had emerged, including hybrids like blues rock , folk rock , country rock , southern rock , raga rock , and jazz rock , which contributed to the development of psychedelic rock , influenced by the countercultural psychedelic and hippie scene . New genres that emerged included progressive rock with extended artistic elements, glam rock , highlighting showmanship and visual style. In the second half of the 1970s, punk rock reacted by producing stripped-down, energetic social and political critiques. Punk was an influence in the 1980s on new wave , post-punk and eventually alternative rock . From the 1990s, alternative rock began to dominate rock music and break into the mainstream in the form of grunge , Britpop , and indie rock . Further fusion subgenres have since emerged, including pop-punk , electronic rock , rap rock , and rap metal . Some movements were conscious attempts to revisit rock's history, including the garage rock / post-punk revival in the 2000s. Since the 2010s, rock has lost its position as the pre-eminent popular music genre in world culture, but remains commercially successful. The increased influence of hip-hop and electronic dance music can be seen in rock music, notably in the techno-pop scene of the early 2010s and the pop-punk-hip-hop revival of the 2020s. Rock has also embodied and served as the vehicle for cultural and social movements, leading to major subcultures including mods and rockers in the U.K., the hippie movement and the wider Western counterculture movement that spread out from San Francisco in the U.S. in the 1960s, the latter of which continues to this day. Similarly, 1970s punk culture spawned the goth , punk, and emo subcultures. Inheriting the folk tradition of the protest song , rock music has been associated with political activism as well as changes in social attitudes to race, sex, and drug use, and is often seen as an expression of youth revolt against adult consumerism and conformity . At the same time, it has been commercially highly successful, leading to accusations of selling out . Characteristics[ edit ] A good definition of rock, in fact, is that it's popular music that to a certain degree doesn't care if it's popular. — Bill Wyman in Vulture (2016) [4] Red Hot Chili Peppers in 2006, showing a quartet lineup for a rock band (from left to right: bassist, lead vocalist, drummer, and guitarist) The sound of rock is traditionally centered on the amplified electric guitar, which emerged in its modern form in the 1950s with the popularity of rock and roll. [5] It was also greatly influenced by the sounds of electric blues guitarists. [6] The sound of an electric guitar in rock music is typically supported by an electric bass guitar, which pioneered in jazz music in the same era, [7] and by percussion produced from a drum kit that combines drums and cymbals. [8] This trio of instruments has often been complemented by the inclusion of other instruments, particularly keyboards such as the piano, the Hammond organ , and the synthesizer. [9] The basic rock instrumentation was derived from the basic blues band instrumentation (prominent lead guitar, second chordal instrument, bass, and drums). [6] A group of musicians performing rock music is termed as a rock band or a rock group. Furthermore, it typically consists of between three (the power trio ) and five members. Classically, a rock band takes the form of a quartet whose members cover one or more roles, including vocalist, lead guitarist, rhythm guitarist, bass guitarist, drummer, and often keyboard player or other instrumentalist. [10] Audio playback is not supported in your browser. You can download the audio file . A simple 44 drum pattern common in rock music Rock music is traditionally built on a foundation of simple syncopated rhythms in a 44 meter , with a repetitive snare drum back beat on beats two and four. [11] Melodies often originate from older musical modes such as the Dorian and Mixolydian , as well as major and minor modes. Harmonies range from the common triad to parallel perfect fourths and fifths and dissonant harmonic progressions. [11] Since the late 1950s, [12] and particularly from the mid-1960s onwards, rock music often used the verse–chorus structure derived from blues and folk music, but there has been considerable variation from this model. [13] Critics have stressed the eclecticism and stylistic diversity of rock. [14] Because of its complex history and its tendency to borrow from other musical and cultural forms, it has been argued that "it is impossible to bind rock music to a rigidly delineated musical definition." [15] In the opinion of music journalist Robert Christgau , "the best rock jolts folk-art virtues—directness, utility, natural audience—into the present with shots of modern technology and modernist dissociation ". [16] Rock and roll was conceived as an outlet for adolescent yearnings ... To make rock and roll is also an ideal way to explore intersections of sex, love, violence, and fun, to broadcast the delights and limitations of the regional , and to deal with the depredations and benefits of mass culture itself. — Robert Christgau in Christgau's Record Guide (1981) [17] Unlike many earlier styles of popular music, rock lyrics have dealt with a wide range of themes, including romantic love, sex, rebellion against " The Establishment ", social concerns, and life styles. [11] These themes were inherited from a variety of sources such as the Tin Pan Alley pop tradition, folk music , and rhythm and blues . [18] Christgau characterizes rock lyrics as a "cool medium" with simple diction and repeated refrains, and asserts that rock's primary "function" "pertains to music, or, more generally, noise ." [19] The predominance of white, male, and often middle class musicians in rock music has often been noted, [20] and rock has been seen as an appropriation of Black musical forms for a young, white and largely male audience. [21] As a result, it has also been seen to articulate the concerns of this group in both style and lyrics. [22] Christgau, writing in 1972, said in spite of some exceptions, "rock and roll usually implies an identification of male sexuality and aggression". [23] Since the term "rock" started being used in preference to "rock and roll" from the late-1960s, it has usually been contrasted with pop music, with which it has shared many characteristics, but from which it is often distanced by an emphasis on musicianship, live performance, and a focus on serious and progressive themes as part of an ideology of authenticity that is frequently combined with an awareness of the genre's history and development. [24] According to Simon Frith , rock was "something more than pop, something more than rock and roll" and "[r]ock musicians combined an emphasis on skill and technique with the romantic concept of art as artistic expression, original and sincere". [24] In the new millennium, the term rock has occasionally been used as a blanket term including forms like pop music, reggae music , soul music , and even hip hop , which it has been influenced with but often contrasted through much of its history. [25] Christgau has used the term broadly to refer to popular and semipopular music that caters to his sensibility as "a rock-and-roller", including a fondness for a good beat, a meaningful lyric with some wit, and the theme of youth, which holds an "eternal attraction" so objective "that all youth music partakes of sociology and the field report ." Writing in Christgau's Record Guide: The '80s (1990), he said this sensibility is evident in the music of folk singer-songwriter Michelle Shocked , rapper LL Cool J , and synth-pop duo Pet Shop Boys —"all kids working out their identities"—as much as it is in the music of Chuck Berry , the Ramones , and the Replacements . [26] 1940s–1950s: Birth of rock and roll[ edit ] Rock and roll[ edit ] See also: Origins of rock and roll and Rockabilly Chuck Berry in a 1958 publicity photo The foundations of rock music are in rock and roll, which originated in the United States during the late 1940s and early 1950s, and quickly spread to much of the rest of the world. Its immediate origins lay in a melding of various black musical genres of the time, including rhythm and blues and gospel music , with country and western . [27] Debate surrounds the many recordings which have been suggested as "the first rock and roll record ". Contenders include " Strange Things Happening Every Day " by Sister Rosetta Tharpe (1944); [28] " The House of Blue Lights " by Ella Mae Morse and Freddie Slack (1946); [29] Wynonie Harris ' " Good Rocking Tonight " (1948); [30] Goree Carter 's "Rock Awhile" (1949); [31] Jimmy Preston 's " Rock the Joint " (1949), which was later covered by Bill Haley & His Comets in 1952; [32] and " Rocket 88 " by Jackie Brenston and his Delta Cats (in fact, Ike Turner and his band the Kings of Rhythm ), recorded by Sam Phillips for Chess Records in 1951. [33] In 1951, Cleveland, Ohio disc jockey Alan Freed began playing rhythm and blues music (then termed " race music ") for a multi-racial audience, and is credited with first using the phrase "rock and roll" to describe the music. [34] Four years later, Bill Haley 's " Rock Around the Clock " (1954) became the first rock and roll song to top Billboard magazine's main sales and airplay charts, and opened the door worldwide for this new wave of popular culture. [35] [36] Other artists with early rock and roll hits included Chuck Berry , Bo Diddley , Fats Domino , Little Richard , Jerry Lee Lewis , and Gene Vincent . [33] Soon rock and roll was the major force in American record sales and crooners , such as Eddie Fisher , Perry Como , and Patti Page , who had dominated the previous decade of popular music, found their access to the pop charts significantly curtailed. [37] Rock and roll has been seen as leading to a number of distinct subgenres, including rockabilly, combining rock and roll with "hillbilly" country music, which was usually played and recorded in the mid-1950s by white singers such as Carl Perkins , Jerry Lee Lewis, Buddy Holly and with the greatest commercial success, Elvis Presley . [38] Hispanic and Latino American movements in rock and roll, which would eventually lead to the success of Latin rock and Chicano rock within the US, began to rise in the Southwest ; with rock and roll standard musician Ritchie Valens and even those within other heritage genres, such as Al Hurricane along with his brothers Tiny Morrie and Baby Gaby as they began combining rock and roll with country- western within traditional New Mexico music . [39] Other styles like doo-wop placed an emphasis on multi-part vocal harmonies and backing lyrics (from which the genre later gained its name), which were usually supported with light instrumentation and had its origins in 1930s and 1940s African American vocal groups. [40] Acts like the Crows , the Penguins , the El Dorados and the Turbans all scored major hits, and groups like the Platters , with songs including " The Great Pretender " (1955), [41] and the Coasters with humorous songs like " Yakety Yak " (1958), [42] ranked among the most successful rock and roll acts of the period. [43] The era also saw the growth in popularity of the electric guitar, and the development of a specifically rock and roll style of playing through such exponents as Chuck Berry, Link Wray , and Scotty Moore . [44] The use of distortion , pioneered by Western swing guitarists such as Junior Barnard [45] and Eldon Shamblin was popularized by Chuck Berry in the mid-1950s. [46] The use of power chords , pioneered by Francisco Tárrega and Heitor Villa-Lobos in the 19th century and later on by Willie Johnson and Pat Hare in the early 1950s, was popularized by Link Wray in the late 1950s. [47] Commentators have traditionally perceived a decline of rock and roll in the late 1950s and early 1960s. By 1959, the death of Buddy Holly, the Big Bopper and Ritchie Valens in a plane crash, the departure of Elvis for the army, the retirement of Little Richard to become a preacher, prosecutions of Jerry Lee Lewis and Chuck Berry and the breaking of the payola scandal (which implicated major figures, including Alan Freed, in bribery and corruption in promoting individual acts or songs), gave a sense that the rock and roll era established at that point had come to an end. [48] Global spread[ edit ] British rock and roll singer Tommy Steele in a 1958 promotional photo Rock quickly spread out from its origins in the US, associated with the rapid Americanization that was taking place globally in the aftermath of World War Two . [49] Cliff Richard is credited with one of the first rock and roll hits outside of North America with " Move It " (1959), effectively ushering in the sound of British rock . [50] Several artists, most prominently Tommy Steele from the UK, found success with covers of major American rock and roll hits before the recordings could spread internationally, often translating them into local languages where appropriate. [51] [52] Steele in particular toured Britain, Scandinavia, Australia, the USSR and South Africa from 1955 to 1957, influencing the globalisation of rock. [51] By the late 1950s, as well as in the American-influenced Western world, rock was popular in communist states such as Yugoslavia, [53] and the USSR, [54] as well as in regions such as South America. [52] In the late 1950s and early 1960s, American blues music and blues rock artists, who had been surpassed by the rise of rock and roll in the US, found new popularity in the UK, visiting with successful tours. [55] Lonnie Donegan 's 1955 hit " Rock Island Line " was a major influence and helped to develop the trend of skiffle music groups throughout the country, many of which, including John Lennon 's Quarrymen (later the Beatles ), moved on to play rock and roll. [56] While former rock and roll market in the US was becoming dominated by lightweight pop and ballads, British rock groups at clubs and local dances were developing a style more strongly influenced by blues-rock pioneers, and were starting to play with an intensity and drive seldom found in white American acts; [57] this influence would go on to shape the future of rock music through the British Invasion . [55] Rise of pop[ edit ] See also: Doo-wop , British rock and roll , and Soul music The term pop has been used since the early 20th century to refer to popular music in general, but from the mid-1950s it began to be used for a distinct genre, aimed at a youth market, often characterized as a softer alternative to rock and roll. [58] [59] From about 1967, it was increasingly used in opposition to the term rock music, to describe a form that was more commercial, ephemeral and accessible. [24] In contrast rock music was seen as focusing on extended works, particularly albums, was often associated with particular sub-cultures (like the counterculture of the 1960s ), placed an emphasis on artistic values and "authenticity", stressed live performance and instrumental or vocal virtuosity and was often seen as encapsulating progressive developments rather than simply reflecting existing trends. [24] [58] [59] [60] Nevertheless, much pop and rock music has been very similar in sound, instrumentation and even lyrical content. [nb 1] The period of the later 1950s and early 1960s has traditionally been seen as an era of hiatus for rock and roll. [64] More recently some authors[ weasel words ] have emphasised important innovations and trends in this period without which future developments would not have been possible. [65] [66] While early rock and roll, particularly through the advent of rockabilly, saw the greatest commercial success for male and white performers, in this era, the genre was dominated by black and female artists. Rock and roll had not disappeared at the end of the 1950s and some of its energy can be seen in the Twist dance craze of the early 1960s, mainly benefiting the career of Chubby Checker . [66] [nb 2] Some music historians have also pointed to important and innovative technical developments that built on rock and roll in this period, including the electronic treatment of sound by such innovators as Joe Meek , and the elaborate production methods of the Wall of Sound pursued by Phil Spector . [66] 1960s: British invasion and broadening sound[ edit ] Instrumental rock and surf[ edit ] The Beach Boys performing in 1964 The instrumental rock and roll of performers such as Duane Eddy , Link Wray and the Ventures was further developed by Dick Dale , who added distinctive "wet" reverb , rapid alternate picking, and Middle Eastern and Mexican influences. He produced the regional hit " Let's Go Trippin' " in 1961 and launched the surf music craze, following up with songs like " Misirlou " (1962). [69] Like Dale and his Del-Tones , most early surf bands were formed in Southern California, including the Bel-Airs , the Challengers , and Eddie & the Showmen . [69] The Chantays scored a top ten national hit with " Pipeline " in 1963 and probably the best-known surf tune was 1963's " Wipe Out ", by the Surfaris , which hit number 2 and number 10 on the Billboard charts in 1965. [70] Surf rock was also popular in Europe during this time, with the British group the Shadows scoring hits in the early 1960s with instrumentals such as " Apache " and " Kon-Tiki ", while Swedish surf group the Spotnicks saw success in both Sweden and Britain. Surf music achieved its greatest commercial success as vocal pop music, particularly the work of the Beach Boys , formed in 1961 in Southern California. Their early albums included both instrumental surf rock (among them covers of music by Dick Dale) and vocal songs, drawing on rock and roll and doo wop and the close harmonies of vocal pop acts like the Four Freshmen . [71] The Beach Boys first chart hit, " Surfin' " in 1962 reached the Billboard top 100 and helped make the surf music craze a national phenomenon. [72] It is often argued that the surf music craze and the careers of almost all surf acts was effectively ended by the arrival of the British Invasion from 1964, because most surf music hits were recorded and released between 1961 and 1965. [73] [nb 3]
Toggle the table of contents Soul music From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of music This article is about the genre of music. For other uses, see Soul music (disambiguation) . Soul Ray Charles helped pioneer soul music Stylistic origins Late 1950s – early 1960s, United States Derivative forms e Soul music is a popular music genre that originated in the African American community throughout the United States in the late 1950s and early 1960s. [2] It has its roots in African-American gospel music and rhythm and blues . [3] Soul music became popular for dancing and listening, where U.S. record labels such as Motown , Atlantic and Stax were influential during the Civil Rights Movement . Soul also became popular around the world, directly influencing rock music and the music of Africa . [4] It also had a resurgence in the mid-to late 1990s with the subgenre neo-soul , [5] which added modern production elements and influence from hip-hop. Catchy rhythms, stressed by handclaps and extemporaneous body moves, are an important feature of soul music. Other characteristics are a call and response between the lead vocalist and the chorus and an especially tense vocal sound. [6] The style also occasionally uses improvisational additions, twirls, and auxiliary sounds. [6] Soul music reflects the African-American identity, and it stresses the importance of an African-American culture. The new-found African-American consciousness led to new styles of music that boasted pride in being black, [7] and being such a creative genre of music, it emerged from the power struggle to increase black Americans' awareness of their African ancestry. [8] Soul music also combines different elements of music which includes gospel music, rhythm and blues and jazz. [9] Soul music dominated the U.S. R&B chart in the 1960s, and many recordings crossed over into the pop charts in the U.S., Britain, and elsewhere. By 1968, the soul music genre had begun to splinter. Some soul artists developed funk music, while other singers and groups developed slicker, more sophisticated, and in some cases more politically conscious varieties. [10] Many soul artists gained popularity due to the domination of soul music in the R&B charts. Among these artists were Ray Charles , James Brown and the soul group the Temptations . [11] By the early 1970s, soul music had been influenced by psychedelic and progressive rock , among other genres, leading to psychedelic and progressive soul . The United States saw the development of neo soul around 1994. There are also several other subgenres and offshoots of soul music. The key subgenres of soul include the Motown style, a more pop -friendly and rhythmic style; deep soul and southern soul, driving, energetic soul styles combining R&B with southern gospel music sounds; Memphis soul , a shimmering, sultry style; New Orleans soul , which came out of the rhythm and blues style; Chicago soul , a lighter gospel-influenced sound; Philadelphia soul , a lush orchestral sound with doo-wop -inspired vocals; as well as psychedelic soul , a blend of psychedelic rock and soul music. Origins[ edit ] Ray Charles pioneered the soul music genre during the 1950s by combining blues, rhythm and blues, and gospel styles Soul music has its roots in traditional African-American gospel music and rhythm and blues and as the hybridization of their respective religious and secular styles – in both lyrical content and instrumentation – that began in the 1950s. The term "soul" had been used among African-American musicians to emphasize the feeling of being an African-American in the United States. [12] According to musicologist Barry Hansen , [13] Though this hybrid produced a clutch of hits in the R&B market in the early 1950s, only the most adventurous white fans felt its impact at the time; the rest had to wait for the coming of soul music in the 1960s to feel the rush of rock and roll sung gospel-style. James Brown was known as the "Godfather of Soul" [14] According to AllMusic, "Soul music was the result of the urbanization and commercialization of rhythm and blues in the '60s." [15] The phrase "soul music" itself, referring to gospel-style music with secular lyrics, was first attested in 1961. [16] The term "soul" in African-American parlance has connotations of African-American pride and culture. Gospel groups in the 1940s and '50s occasionally used the term as part of their names. The jazz style that originated from gospel became known as soul jazz . As singers and arrangers began using techniques from both gospel and soul jazz in African-American popular music during the 1960s, soul music gradually functioned as an umbrella term for African-American popular music at the time. [17] [18] Sam Cooke is acknowledged as one of soul music's "forefathers". According to the Acoustic Music organization, the "first clear evidence of soul music shows up with the "5" Royales , an ex-gospel group that turned to R&B and in Faye Adams , whose "Shake A Hand" becomes an R&B standard". [19] Important innovators whose recordings in the 1950s contributed to the emergence of soul music included Clyde McPhatter , Hank Ballard , and Etta James . [13] Ray Charles is often cited as popularizing the soul music genre with his series of hits, starting with 1954's " I Got a Woman ". [20] Singer Bobby Womack said, "Ray was the genius. He turned the world onto soul music." [10] Charles was open in acknowledging the influence of Pilgrim Travelers vocalist Jesse Whitaker on his singing style. Little Richard , who inspired Otis Redding , [21] and James Brown both were equally influential. Brown was nicknamed the "Godfather of Soul Music", [14] and Richard proclaimed himself as the "King of Rockin' and Rollin', Rhythm and Blues Soulin'", because his music embodied elements of all three, and since he inspired artists in all three genres. [22] Sam Cooke and Jackie Wilson also are often acknowledged as soul forefathers. [10] [23] Cooke became popular as the lead singer of the gospel group the Soul Stirrers , before controversially moving into secular music. His recording of " You Send Me " in 1957 launched a successful pop music career. Furthermore, his 1962 recording of " Bring It On Home To Me " has been described as "perhaps the first record to define the soul experience". [24] Jackie Wilson, a contemporary of both Cooke and James Brown, also achieved crossover success, especially with his 1957 hit " Reet Petite ". [25] He even was particularly influential for his dramatic delivery and performances. [26] 1960s[ edit ] Solomon Burke recorded for Atlantic in the 1960s Husband-wife duo Ike & Tina Turner emerged as "leading exponents" of soul music in the 1960s. [27] [28] Their debut single " A Fool in Love " crossed over to the pop charts in 1960. They earned a Grammy nomination for their song " It's Gonna Work Out Fine " in 1962. [29] Along with the Kings of Rhythm and the Ikettes , they toured the Chitlin Circuit as the Ike & Tina Turner Revue. [30] Writer Peter Guralnick is among those to identify Solomon Burke as a key figure in the emergence of soul music, and Atlantic Records as the key record label . Burke's early 1960s songs, including " Cry to Me ", " Just Out of Reach " and "Down in the Valley" are considered classics of the genre. Guralnick wrote: Soul started, in a sense, with the 1961 success of Solomon Burke's "Just Out Of Reach". Ray Charles, of course, had already enjoyed enormous success (also on Atlantic), as had James Brown and Sam Cooke — primarily in a pop vein.  Each of these singers, though, could be looked upon as an isolated phenomenon; it was only with the coming together of Burke and Atlantic Records that you could begin to see anything even resembling a movement. [31] Aretha Franklin is widely known as the " Queen of Soul " Ben E. King also achieved success in 1961 with " Stand By Me ", a song directly based on a gospel hymn. [10] By the mid-1960s, the initial successes of Burke, King, and others had been surpassed by new soul singers, including Stax artists such as Otis Redding and Wilson Pickett , who mainly recorded in Memphis, Tennessee , and Muscle Shoals, Alabama .  According to Jon Landau : Between 1962 and 1964 Redding recorded a series of soul ballads characterized by unabashedly sentimental lyrics usually begging forgiveness or asking a girlfriend to come home... He soon became known as "Mr. Pitiful" and earned a reputation as the leading performer of soul ballads. [32] The most important female soul singer to emerge was Aretha Franklin , originally a gospel singer who began to make secular recordings in 1960 but whose career was later revitalized by her recordings for Atlantic.  Her 1967 recordings, such as " I Never Loved a Man (The Way I Love You) ", " Respect " (written and originally recorded by Otis Redding), and " Do Right Woman, Do Right Man " (written by Chips Moman and Dan Penn ), were significant and commercially successful productions. [33] [34] [35] [36] The Miracles pictured in 1962. Known as Motown 's "soul supergroup", The Miracles were one of the first commercially successful acts of the 1960s and propelled both Motown and its Tamla label to international fame. Soul music dominated the U.S. African-American music charts in the 1960s, and many recordings crossed over into the pop charts in the U.S.  Otis Redding was a huge success at the Monterey Pop Festival in 1967. [10] The genre also became highly popular in the UK, where many leading acts toured in the late 1960s. "Soul" became an umbrella term for an increasingly wide variety of R&B-based music styles – from the dance and pop-oriented acts at Motown Records in Detroit , such as the Miracles , the Temptations , Marvin Gaye and Stevie Wonder , to " deep soul " performers such as Percy Sledge and James Carr . [37] [38] [39] Different regions and cities within the U.S., including New York City, Detroit, Chicago, Memphis , New Orleans , Philadelphia , and Muscle Shoals, Alabama (the home of FAME Studios and Muscle Shoals Sound Studios ) became noted for different subgenres of the music and recording styles. [15] [40] By 1968, while at its peak of popularity, soul began to fragment into different subgenres.  Artists such as James Brown and Sly and the Family Stone evolved into funk music, while other singers such as Marvin Gaye, Stevie Wonder, Curtis Mayfield and Al Green developed slicker, more sophisticated and in some cases more politically conscious varieties of the genre. [10] However, soul music continued to evolve, informing most subsequent forms of R&B from the 1970s-onward, with pockets of musicians continuing to perform in traditional soul style. [15] 1970s and 1980s[ edit ] Marvin Gaye shifted to a soul sound with his 1971 hit " What's Going On " Mitchell's Hi Records continued in the Stax tradition of the previous decade, releasing a string of hits by Green, Ann Peebles , Otis Clay , O.V. Wright and Syl Johnson . [41] Bobby Womack , who recorded with Chips Moman in the late 1960s, continued to produce soul recordings in the 1970s and 1980s. [42] [43] In Detroit , producer Don Davis worked with Stax artists such as Johnnie Taylor and the Dramatics . [44] Early 1970s recordings by the Detroit Emeralds , such as Do Me Right , are a link between soul and the later disco style. [45] Motown Records artists such as Marvin Gaye , Michael Jackson , Stevie Wonder and Smokey Robinson contributed to the evolution of soul music, although their recordings were considered more in a pop music vein than those of Redding, Franklin and Carr. [37] Although stylistically different from classic soul music, recordings by Chicago -based artists are often considered part of the genre. [46] By the early 1970s, soul music had been influenced by psychedelic rock and other genres. [47] Artists like James Brown led soul towards funk music, which became typified by 1970s bands like Parliament-Funkadelic and the Meters . [48] More versatile groups such as War , the Commodores , and Earth, Wind and Fire became popular around this time. [49] During the 1970s, some slick and commercial blue-eyed soul acts like Philadelphia's Hall & Oates and Oakland's Tower of Power achieved mainstream success, as did a new generation of street-corner harmony or "city-soul" groups such as the Delfonics and the historically black Howard University 's Unifics . [50] [51] The syndicated music/dance variety television series Soul Train , hosted by Chicago native Don Cornelius , debuted in 1971. [52] The show provided an outlet for soul music for several decades, also spawning a franchise that saw the creation of a record label ( Soul Train Records ) that distributed music by the Whispers , Carrie Lucas , and an up-and-coming group known as Shalamar . [53] Numerous disputes led to Cornelius spinning off the record label to his talent booker, Dick Griffey , who transformed the label into Solar Records , itself a prominent soul music label throughout the 1980s. [53] The TV series continued to air until 2006, although other predominantly African-American music genres such as hip-hop began overshadowing soul on the show beginning in the 1980s. [54] Beyond[ edit ] As disco and funk musicians had hits in the late 1970s and early 1980s, soul went in the direction of quiet storm . With its relaxed tempos and soft melodies, quiet storm soul took influences from fusion and adult contemporary . Some funk bands, such as EW&F, the Commodores and Con Funk Shun would have a few quiet storm tracks on their albums. Among the most successful acts in this era include Smokey Robinson, Jeffry Osbourne, Peabo Bryson , Chaka Khan , and Larry Graham . After the decline of disco and funk in the early 1980s, soul music became influenced by electro music . It became less raw and more slickly produced, resulting in a style is known as contemporary R&B , which sounded very different from the original rhythm and blues style. The United States saw the development of neo-soul around 1994. Notable labels and producers[ edit ] Motown Records[ edit ] Levi Stubbs singing lead with the Four Tops in 1966 This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2014) (
Toggle the table of contents Heavy metal music (Redirected from Metal music ) Genre of rock music This article is about the genre. For its subgenres, see heavy metal genres . For the 2013 Newsted album, see Heavy Metal Music (album) . For other uses, see Heavy metal (disambiguation) . Heavy metal Late 1960s, United Kingdom and United States Subgenres 2024 in heavy metal music Heavy metal (or simply metal) is a genre of rock music that developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s, largely in the United Kingdom and United States. [2] With roots in blues rock , psychedelic rock and acid rock , heavy metal bands developed a thick, monumental sound characterized by distorted guitars, extended guitar solos , emphatic beats and loudness . In 1968, three of the genre's most famous pioneers – British bands Led Zeppelin , Black Sabbath and Deep Purple – were founded. [3] Though they came to attract wide audiences, they were often derided by critics. Several American bands modified heavy metal into more accessible forms during the 1970s: the raw, sleazy sound and shock rock of Alice Cooper and Kiss ; the blues-rooted rock of Aerosmith ; and the flashy guitar leads and party rock of Van Halen . [4] During the mid-1970s, Judas Priest helped spur the genre's evolution by discarding much of its blues influence, [5] [6] while Motörhead introduced a punk rock sensibility and an increasing emphasis on speed. Beginning in the late 1970s, bands in the new wave of British heavy metal such as Iron Maiden and Saxon followed in a similar vein. By the end of the decade, heavy metal fans became known as " metalheads " or " headbangers ". The lyrics of some metal genres became associated with aggression and machismo , [7] an issue that has at times led to accusations of misogyny. During the 1980s, glam metal became popular with groups such as Bon Jovi , Mötley Crüe and Poison . Meanwhile, however, underground scenes produced an array of more aggressive styles: thrash metal broke into the mainstream with bands such as Metallica , Slayer , Megadeth and Anthrax , while other extreme subgenres such as death metal and black metal became – and remain – subcultural phenomena. Since the mid-1990s, popular styles have expanded the definition of the genre. These include groove metal and nu metal , the latter of which often incorporates elements of grunge and hip-hop . Characteristics Heavy metal is traditionally characterized by loud distorted guitars, emphatic rhythms, dense bass-and-drum sound and vigorous vocals. Heavy metal subgenres variously emphasize, alter or omit one or more of these attributes. In a 1988 article, The New York Times critic Jon Pareles wrote, "In the taxonomy of popular music, heavy metal is a major subspecies of hard-rock—the breed with less syncopation, less blues, more showmanship and more brute force." [8] The typical band lineup includes a drummer, a bassist, a rhythm guitarist, a lead guitarist and a singer, who may or may not be an instrumentalist. Keyboard instruments are sometimes used to enhance the fullness of the sound. [9] Deep Purple 's Jon Lord played an overdriven Hammond organ . In 1970, John Paul Jones used a Moog synthesizer on Led Zeppelin III ; by the 1990s, synthesizers were used in "almost every subgenre of heavy metal". [10] Judas Priest performing in 2005 The electric guitar and the sonic power that it projects through amplification has historically been the key element in heavy metal. [11] The heavy metal guitar sound comes from a combined use of high volumes and heavy fuzz . [12] For classic heavy metal guitar tone, guitarists maintain gain at moderate levels, without excessive preamp or pedal distortion, to retain open spaces and air in the music; the guitar amplifier is turned up loud to produce the "punch and grind" characteristic. [13] Thrash metal guitar tone has scooped mid-frequencies and tightly compressed sound with multiple bass frequencies. [13] Guitar solos are "an essential element of the heavy metal code ... that underscores the significance of the guitar" to the genre. [14] Most heavy metal songs "feature at least one guitar solo", [15] which is "a primary means through which the heavy metal performer expresses virtuosity". [16] Some exceptions are nu metal and grindcore bands, which tend to omit guitar solos. [17] With rhythm guitar parts, the "heavy crunch sound in heavy metal ... [is created by] palm muting " the strings with the picking hand and using distortion. [18] Palm muting creates a tighter, more precise sound and it emphasizes the low end. [19] The lead role of the guitar in heavy metal often collides with the traditional "frontman" or bandleader role of the vocalist, creating a musical tension as the two "contend for dominance" in a spirit of "affectionate rivalry". [9] Heavy metal "demands the subordination of the voice" to the overall sound of the band. Reflecting metal's roots in the 1960s counterculture, an "explicit display of emotion" is required from the vocals as a sign of authenticity. [20] Critic Simon Frith claims that the metal singer's "tone of voice" is more important than the lyrics. [21] The prominent role of the bass ‍is also key to the metal sound, and the interplay of bass and guitar is a central element. The bass provides the low-end sound crucial to making the music "heavy". [22] The bass plays a "more important role in heavy metal than in any other genre of rock". [23] Metal basslines vary widely in complexity, from holding down a low pedal point as a foundation to doubling complex riffs and licks along with the lead or rhythm guitars. Some bands feature the bass as a lead instrument, an approach popularized by Metallica 's Cliff Burton with his heavy emphasis on bass ‍solos and use of chords while playing the ‍bass in the early 1980s. [24] Lemmy of Motörhead often played overdriven power chords in his bass lines. [25] The essence of heavy metal drumming is creating a loud, constant beat for the band using the "trifecta of speed, power, and precision". [26] Heavy metal drumming "requires an exceptional amount of endurance", and drummers have to develop "considerable speed, coordination, and dexterity ... to play the intricate patterns" used in heavy metal. [27] A characteristic metal drumming technique is the cymbal choke , which consists of striking a cymbal and then immediately silencing it by grabbing it with the other hand (or, in some cases, the same striking hand), producing a burst of sound. The metal drum setup is generally much larger than those employed in other forms of rock music. [22] Black metal, death metal and some "mainstream metal" bands "all depend upon double-kicks and blast beats ". [28] Enid Williams from Girlschool and Lemmy from Motörhead live in 2009. The ties that bind the two bands started in the 1980s and were still strong in the 2010s. In live performance, loudness – an "onslaught of sound", in sociologist Deena Weinstein 's description – is considered vital. [11] In his book, Metalheads, psychologist Jeffrey Arnett refers to heavy metal concerts as "the sensory equivalent of war". [29] Following the lead set by Jimi Hendrix , Cream and the Who , early heavy metal acts such as Blue Cheer set new benchmarks for volume. As Blue Cheer's Dick Peterson put it, "All we knew was we wanted more power." [30] A 1977 review of a Motörhead concert noted how "excessive volume in particular figured into the band's impact". [31] Weinstein makes the case that in the same way that melody is the main element of pop and rhythm is the main focus of house music , powerful sound, timbre and volume are the key elements of metal. She argues that the loudness is designed to "sweep the listener into the sound" and to provide a "shot of youthful vitality". [11] Heavy metal performers tended to be almost exclusively male [32] until at least the mid-1980s, [33] with some exceptions such as Girlschool . [32] However, by the 2010s, women were making more of an impact, [34] [35] and PopMatters' Craig Hayes argues that metal "clearly empowers women". [36] In the power metal and symphonic metal subgenres, there has been a sizable number of bands that have had women as the lead singers, such as Nightwish , Delain and Within Temptation . Musical language Rhythm and tempo An example of a rhythmic pattern used in heavy metal. The upper stave is a palm-muted rhythm guitar part. The lower stave is the drum part. Rhythmic Pattern Audio The rhythm in metal songs is emphatic, with deliberate stresses. Weinstein observes that the wide array of sonic effects available to metal drummers enables the "rhythmic pattern to take on a complexity within its elemental drive and insistency". [22] In many heavy metal songs, the main groove is characterized by short, two- or three-note rhythmic figures – generally made up of eighth or 16th notes . These rhythmic figures are usually performed with a staccato attack created by using a palm-muted technique on the rhythm guitar. [37] Brief, abrupt and detached rhythmic cells are joined into rhythmic phrases with a distinctive, often jerky texture. These phrases are used to create rhythmic accompaniment and melodic figures called riffs , which help to establish thematic hooks . Heavy metal songs also use longer rhythmic figures such as whole note - or dotted quarter note-length chords in slow-tempo power ballads . The tempos in early heavy metal music tended to be "slow, even ponderous". [22] By the late 1970s, however, metal bands were employing a wide variety of tempos, and as recently as the 2000s, metal tempos range from slow ballad tempos (quarter note = 60 beats per minute ) to extremely fast blast beat tempos (quarter note = 350 beats per minute). [27] Harmony One of the signatures of the genre is the guitar power chord. [38] In technical terms, the power chord is relatively simple: it involves just one main interval , generally the perfect fifth , though an octave may be added as a doubling of the root . When power chords are played on the lower strings at high volumes and with distortion, additional low-frequency sounds are created, which add to the "weight of the sound" and create an effect of "overwhelming power". [39] Although the perfect fifth interval is the most common basis for the power chord, [40] power chords are also based on different intervals such as the minor third , major third , perfect fourth , diminished fifth or minor sixth . [41] Most power chords are also played with a consistent finger arrangement that can be slid easily up and down the fretboard . [42] Typical harmonic structures Heavy metal is usually based on riffs created with three main harmonic traits: modal scale progressions, tritone and chromatic progressions, and the use of pedal points . Traditional heavy metal tends to employ modal scales, in particular the Aeolian and Phrygian modes . [43] Harmonically speaking, this means the genre typically incorporates modal chord progressions such as the Aeolian progressions I-♭VI-♭VII, I-♭VII-(♭VI), or I-♭VI-IV-♭VII and Phrygian progressions implying the relation between I and ♭II (I-♭II-I, I-♭II-III, or I-♭II-VII for example). Tense-sounding chromatic or tritone relationships are used in a number of metal chord progressions. [44] [45] In addition to using modal harmonic relationships, heavy metal also uses " pentatonic and blues-derived features". [46] The tritone, an interval spanning three whole tones – such as C to F# – was considered extremely dissonant and unstable by medieval and Renaissance music theorists. It was nicknamed the diabolus in musica – "the devil in music". [47] Heavy metal songs often make extensive use of pedal point as a harmonic basis. A pedal point is a sustained tone, typically in the bass range, during which at least one foreign (i.e., dissonant) harmony is sounded in the other parts. [48] According to Robert Walser, heavy metal harmonic relationships are "often quite complex" and the harmonic analysis done by metal players and teachers is "often very sophisticated". [49] In the study of heavy metal chord structures, it has been concluded that "heavy metal music has proved to be far more complicated" than other music researchers had realized. [46] Relationship with classical music Ritchie Blackmore , founder of Deep Purple and Rainbow , known for the neoclassical approach in his guitar performances. Robert Walser stated that, alongside blues and R&B, the "assemblage of disparate musical styles known ... as ' classical music '" has been a major influence on heavy metal since the genre's earliest days, and that metal's "most influential musicians have been guitar players who have also studied classical music. Their appropriation and adaptation of classical models sparked the development of a new kind of guitar virtuosity [and] changes in the harmonic and melodic language of heavy metal." [50] In an article written for Grove Music Online , Walser stated that the "1980s brought on ... the widespread adaptation of chord progressions and virtuosic practices from 18th-century European models, especially Bach and Antonio Vivaldi , by influential guitarists such as Ritchie Blackmore , Marty Friedman , Jason Becker , Uli Jon Roth , Eddie Van Halen , Randy Rhoads and Yngwie Malmsteen ." [51] Kurt Bachmann of Believer has stated that "if done correctly, metal and classical fit quite well together. Classical and metal are probably the two genres that have the most in common when it comes to feel, texture, creativity." [52] Although a number of metal musicians cite classical composers as inspiration, classical and metal are rooted in different cultural traditions and practices – classical in the art music tradition, metal in the popular music tradition. As musicologists Nicolas Cook and Nicola Dibben note: "Analyses of popular music also sometimes reveal the influence of 'art traditions.' An example is Walser's linkage of heavy metal music with the ideologies and even some of the performance practices of nineteenth-century Romanticism . However, it would be clearly wrong to claim that traditions such as blues, rock, heavy metal, rap or dance music derive primarily from "art music.'" [53] Lyrical themes For a more descriptive list, see Heavy metal lyrics . According to David Hatch and Stephen Millward, Black Sabbath and the numerous heavy metal bands that they inspired have concentrated lyrically "on dark and depressing subject matter to an extent hitherto unprecedented in any form of pop music." They take as an example Black Sabbath's second album, Paranoid (1970), which "included songs dealing with personal trauma—' Paranoid ' and ' Fairies Wear Boots ' (which described the unsavoury side effects of drug-taking)—as well as those confronting wider issues, such as the self-explanatory ' War Pigs ' and ' Hand of Doom .'" [54] Deriving from the genre's roots in blues music, sex is another important topic – a thread running from Led Zeppelin's suggestive lyrics to the more explicit references of glam metal and nu metal bands. [55] King Diamond , known for writing conceptual lyrics about horror stories The thematic content of heavy metal has long been a target of criticism. According to Jon Pareles , "Heavy metal's main subject matter is simple and virtually universal. With grunts, moans and subliterary lyrics, it celebrates ... a party without limits ... [T]he bulk of the music is stylized and formulaic." [8] Music critics have often deemed metal lyrics juvenile and banal, and others [56] have objected to what they see as advocacy of misogyny and the occult. During the 1980s, the Parents Music Resource Center petitioned the U.S. Congress to regulate the popular music industry due to what the group asserted were objectionable lyrics, particularly those in heavy metal songs. [57] Andrew Cope stated that claims that heavy metal lyrics are misogynistic are "clearly misguided" as these critics have "overlook[ed] the overwhelming evidence that suggests otherwise". [58] Music critic Robert Christgau called metal "an expressive mode [that] it sometimes seems will be with us for as long as ordinary white boys fear girls, pity themselves, and are permitted to rage against a world they'll never beat". [59] Heavy metal artists have had to defend their lyrics in front of the U.S. Senate and in court. In 1985, Twisted Sister frontman Dee Snider was asked to defend his song " Under the Blade " at a U.S. Senate hearing. At the hearing, the PMRC alleged that the song was about sadomasochism and rape ; Snider stated that the song was about his bandmate's throat surgery. [60] In 1986, Ozzy Osbourne was sued over the lyrics of his song " Suicide Solution ". [61] A lawsuit against Osbourne was filed by the parents of John McCollum, a depressed teenager who committed suicide allegedly after listening to Osbourne's song. Osbourne was not found to be responsible for the teen's death. [62] In 1990, Judas Priest was sued in American court by the parents of two young men who had shot themselves five years earlier, allegedly after hearing the subliminal statement "do it" in the band's cover of the song " Better by You, Better than Me ". [63] While the case attracted a great deal of media attention, it was ultimately dismissed. [57] In 1991, U.K. police seized death metal records from the British record label Earache Records , in an "unsuccessful attempt to prosecute the label for obscenity". [64] In some predominantly Muslim countries, heavy metal has been officially denounced as a threat to traditional values, and in countries such as Morocco, Egypt, Lebanon and Malaysia, there have been incidents of heavy metal musicians and fans being arrested and incarcerated. [65] In 1997, the Egyptian police jailed many young metal fans, and they were accused of "devil worship" and blasphemy after police found metal recordings during searches of their homes. [64] In 2013, Malaysia banned Lamb of God from performing in their country, on the grounds that the "band's lyrics could be interpreted as being religiously insensitive" and blasphemous. [66] Some people consider heavy metal music to be a leading factor for mental health disorders, and that heavy metal fans are more likely to suffer poor mental health, but a study from 2009 suggests that this is not true and that fans of heavy metal music suffer from poor mental health at a similar or lower rate compared to the general population. [67] Image and fashion Main article: Heavy metal fashion Kiss performing in 2004, wearing makeup For many artists and bands, visual imagery plays a large role in heavy metal. In addition to its sound and lyrics, a heavy metal band's image is expressed in album cover art, logos, stage sets, clothing, design of instruments and music videos . [68] Down-the-back long hair is the "most crucial distinguishing feature of metal fashion". [69] Originally adopted from the hippie subculture, by the 1980s and 1990s, heavy metal hair "symbolised the hate, angst and disenchantment of a generation that seemingly never felt at home", according to journalist Nader Rahman. Long hair gave members of the metal community "the power they needed to rebel against nothing in general". [70] The classic uniform of heavy metal fans consists of light-colored, ripped, frayed or torn blue jeans, black T-shirts, boots, and black leather or denim jackets. Deena Weinstein wrote, "T-shirts are generally emblazoned with the logos or other visual representations of favorite metal bands." [71] In the 1980s, a range of sources – from punk rock and goth music to horror films – influenced metal fashion. [72] Many metal performers of the 1970s and 1980s used radically shaped and brightly colored instruments to enhance their stage appearance. [73] [74] Fashion and personal style was especially important for glam metal bands of the era. Performers typically wore long, dyed, hairspray-teased hair (hence the nickname "hair metal"); makeup such as lipstick and eyeliner; gaudy clothing, including leopard-skin-printed shirts or vests and tight denim, leather or spandex pants; and accessories such as headbands and jewelry. [73] Pioneered by the heavy metal act X Japan in the late 1980s, bands in the Japanese movement known as visual kei , which includes many non-metal groups, emphasize elaborate costumes, hair and makeup. [75] Physical gestures Fans raise their fists and make the "devil horns" gesture at a Metsatöll concert When performing live, many metal musicians – as well as the audience for whom they're playing – engage in headbanging , which involves rhythmically beating time with the head, often emphasized by long hair. The il cornuto , or "devil horns", hand gesture was popularized by vocalist Ronnie James Dio during his time with the bands Black Sabbath and Dio . [45] Although Gene Simmons of Kiss claims to have been the first to make the gesture on the 1977 Love Gun album cover, there is speculation as to who started the phenomenon. [76] Attendees of metal concerts do not dance in the usual sense. It has been argued that this is due to the music's largely male audience and "extreme heterosexualist ideology". Two primary body movements used are headbanging and an arm thrust that is both a sign of appreciation and a rhythmic gesture. [77] The performance of air guitar is popular among metal fans both at concerts and listening to records at home. [78] According to Deena Weinstein , thrash metal concerts have two elements that are not part of the other metal genres: moshing and stage diving , which "were imported from the punk/hardcore subculture ". [79] Weinstein states that moshing participants bump and jostle each other as they move in a circle in an area called the "pit" near the stage. Stage divers climb onto the stage with the band and then jump "back into the audience". [79] Fan subculture A heavy metal fan wearing a denim jacket with band patches and artwork of the heavy metal bands Metallica , Guns N' Roses , Iron Maiden , Slipknot , Dio and Led Zeppelin . It has been argued that heavy metal has outlasted many other rock genres largely due to the emergence of an intense, exclusionary and strongly masculine subculture. [80] While the metal fan base is largely young, white, male and blue-collar, the group is "tolerant of those outside its core demographic base who follow its codes of dress, appearance, and behavior". [81] Identification with the subculture is strengthened not only by the group experience of concert-going and shared elements of fashion, but also by contributing to metal magazines and, more recently, websites. [82] Attending live concerts in particular has been called the "holiest of heavy metal communions". [83] The metal scene has been characterized as a "subculture of alienation" with its own code of authenticity. [84] This code puts several demands on performers: they must appear both completely devoted to their music and loyal to the subculture that supports it; they must appear uninterested in mainstream appeal and radio hits; and they must never " sell out ". [85] Deena Weinstein stated that for the fans themselves, the code promotes "opposition to established authority, and separateness from the rest of society". [86] Musician and filmmaker Rob Zombie observed, "Most of the kids who come to my shows seem like really imaginative kids with a lot of creative energy they don't know what to do with" and that metal is "outsider music for outsiders. Nobody wants to be the weird kid; you just somehow end up being the weird kid. It's kind of like that, but with metal you have all the weird kids in one place." [87] Scholars of metal have noted the tendency of fans to classify and reject some performers (and some other fans) as " poseurs " "who pretended to be part of the subculture, but who were deemed to lack authenticity and sincerity". [84] [88] Etymology The origin of the term "heavy metal" in a musical context is uncertain. The phrase has been used for centuries in chemistry and metallurgy, where the periodic table organizes elements of both light and heavy metals (e.g., uranium). An early use of the term in modern popular culture was by countercultural writer William S. Burroughs . His 1961 novel The Soft Machine includes a character known as "Uranian Willy, the Heavy Metal Kid". Burroughs' next novel, Nova Express (1964), develops the theme, using "heavy metal" as a metaphor for addictive drugs: "With their diseases and orgasm drugs and their sexless parasite life forms—Heavy Metal People of Uranus wrapped in cool blue mist of vaporized bank notes—And The Insect People of Minraud with metal music." [89] Inspired by Burroughs' novels, [90] the term was used in the title of the 1967 album Featuring the Human Host and the Heavy Metal Kids by Hapshash and the Coloured Coat , which has been claimed to be its first use in the context of music. [91] The phrase was later lifted by Sandy Pearlman , who used the term to describe the Byrds for their supposed "aluminium style of context and effect", particularly on their album The Notorious Byrd Brothers (1968). [92] Metal historian Ian Christe describes what the components of the term mean in " hippiespeak ": "heavy" is roughly synonymous with "potent" or "profound", and "metal" designates a certain type of mood, grinding and weighted as with metal. [93] The word "heavy" in this sense was a basic element of beatnik and later countercultural hippie slang , and references to "heavy music" – typically slower, more amplified variations of standard pop fare – were already common by the mid-1960s, such as in reference to Vanilla Fudge . Iron Butterfly 's debut album, which was released in early 1968, was titled Heavy . The first use of "heavy metal" in a song lyric is in reference to a motorcycle in the Steppenwolf song " Born to Be Wild ", also released that year: [94] "I like smoke and lightning / Heavy metal thunder / Racin' with the wind / And the feelin' that I'm under". An early documented use of the phrase in rock criticism appears in Sandy Pearlman's February 1967 Crawdaddy review of the Rolling Stones ' Got Live If You Want It (1966), albeit as a description of the sound rather than as a genre: "On this album the Stones go metal. Technology is in the saddle—as an ideal and as a method." [95] [nb 1] Another appears in the 11 May 1968 issue of Rolling Stone , in which Barry Gifford wrote about the album A Long Time Comin' by U.S. band Electric Flag : "Nobody who's been listening to Mike Bloomfield —either talking or playing—in the last few years could have expected this. This is the new soul music, the synthesis of white blues and heavy metal rock." [97] In the 7 September 1968 edition of the Seattle Daily Times, reviewer Susan Schwartz wrote that the Jimi Hendrix Experience "has a heavy-metals blues sound". [98] In January 1970, Lucian K. Truscott IV , reviewing Led Zeppelin II for the Village Voice , described the sound as "heavy" and made comparisons with Blue Cheer and Vanilla Fudge . [99] Other early documented uses of the phrase are from reviews by critic Mike Saunders . In the 12 November 1970 issue of Rolling Stone, he commented on an album put out the previous year by the British band Humble Pie : " Safe as Yesterday Is , their first American release, proved that Humble Pie could be boring in lots of different ways. Here they were a noisy, unmelodic, heavy metal-leaden shit-rock band with the loud and noisy parts beyond doubt. There were a couple of nice songs ... and one monumental pile of refuse." He described the band's latest, self-titled release as "more of the same 27th-rate heavy metal crap". [100] In a review of Sir Lord Baltimore 's Kingdom Come in the May 1971 edition of Creem , Saunders wrote, "Sir Lord Baltimore seems to have down pat most all the best heavy metal tricks in the book." [101] Creem critic Lester Bangs is credited with popularizing the term via his early 1970s essays on bands such as Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath. [102] Through the decade, "heavy metal" was used by certain critics as a virtually automatic putdown. In 1979, lead New York Times popular music critic John Rockwell described what he called "heavy-metal rock" as "brutally aggressive music played mostly for minds clouded by drugs" [103] and, in a different article, as "a crude exaggeration of rock basics that appeals to white teenagers". [104] Coined by Black Sabbath drummer Bill Ward , "downer rock" was one of the earliest terms used to describe this style of music and was applied to acts such as Sabbath and Bloodrock . Classic Rock magazine described the downer rock culture revolving around the use of Quaaludes and the drinking of wine. [105] The term would later be replaced by "heavy metal". [106] Earlier on, as "heavy metal" emerged partially from heavy psychedelic rock, also known as acid rock , "acid rock" was often used interchangeably with "heavy metal" and " hard rock ". "Acid rock" generally describes heavy, hard or raw psychedelic rock. Musicologist Steve Waksman stated that "the distinction between acid rock, hard rock, and heavy metal can at some point never be more than tenuous", [107] while percussionist John Beck defined "acid rock" as synonymous with hard rock and heavy metal. [108] Apart from "acid rock", the terms "heavy metal" and "hard rock" have often been used interchangeably, particularly in discussing bands of the 1970s, a period when the terms were largely synonymous. [109] For example, the 1983 edition of the Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll includes the following passage: "Known for its aggressive blues-based hard-rock style, Aerosmith was the top American heavy-metal band of the mid-Seventies". [110] "The term 'heavy metal' is self-defeating," remarked Kiss bassist Gene Simmons . "When I think of heavy metal, I've always thought of elves and evil dwarves and evil princes and princesses. A lot of the Maiden and Priest records were real metal records. I sure as hell don't think Metallica 's metal, or Guns N' Roses is metal, or Kiss is metal. It just doesn't deal with the ground opening up and little dwarves coming out riding dragons! You know, like bad Dio records." [111] History Heavy metal's quintessential guitar style, which is built around distortion-heavy riffs and power chords, traces its roots to early 1950s Memphis blues guitarists such as Joe Hill Louis , Willie Johnson and particularly Pat Hare , [112] [113] who captured a "grittier, nastier, more ferocious electric guitar sound" on records such as James Cotton 's " Cotton Crop Blues " (1954). [113] Other early influences include the late 1950s instrumentals of Link Wray , particularly " Rumble " (1958); [114] the early 1960s surf rock of Dick Dale , including " Let's Go Trippin' " (1961) and " Misirlou " (1962); and The Kingsmen 's version of " Louie Louie " (1963), which became a garage rock standard. [115] Cream performing on the Dutch television program Fanclub in 1968 However, the genre's direct lineage begins in the mid-1960s. American blues music was a major influence on the early British rockers of the era. Bands like The Rolling Stones and The Yardbirds developed blues rock by recording covers of classic blues songs, often speeding up the tempos . As they experimented with the music, the U.K. blues-based bands – and in turn the U.S. acts they influenced – developed what would become the hallmarks of heavy metal (in particular, the loud, distorted guitar sound). [30] The Kinks played a major role in popularising this sound with their 1964 hit " You Really Got Me ". [116] In addition to The Kinks' Dave Davies , other guitarists such as The Who 's Pete Townshend and The Yardbirds' Jeff Beck were experimenting with feedback. [117] [118] Where the blues rock drumming style started out largely as simple shuffle beats on small kits, drummers began using a more muscular, complex and amplified approach to match and be heard against the increasingly loud guitar. [119] Vocalists similarly modified their technique and increased their reliance on amplification, often becoming more stylized and dramatic. In terms of sheer volume, especially in live performance, The Who's "bigger-louder-wall-of- Marshalls " approach was seminal to the development of the later heavy metal sound. [120] The combination of this loud and heavy blues rock with psychedelic rock and acid rock formed much of the original basis for heavy metal. [121] The variant or subgenre of psychedelic rock often known as " acid rock " was particularly influential on heavy metal and its development; acid rock is often defined as a heavier, louder, or harder variant of psychedelic rock, [122] or the more extreme side of the psychedelic rock genre, frequently containing a loud, improvised, and heavily distorted, guitar-centered sound. Acid rock has been described as psychedelic rock at its "rawest and most intense", emphasizing the heavier qualities associated with both the positive and negative extremes of the psychedelic experience rather than only the idyllic side of psychedelia. [123] In  contrast to more idyllic or whimsical pop psychedelic rock, American acid rock garage bands such as the 13th Floor Elevators epitomized the frenetic, heavier, darker, and more psychotic psychedelic rock sound known as acid rock, a sound characterized by droning guitar riffs, amplified feedback, and guitar distortion, while the 13th Floor Elevators' sound in particular featured yelping vocals and "occasionally demented" lyrics. [124] Frank Hoffman noted that "[Psychedelic rock] was sometimes referred to as 'acid rock'. The latter label was applied to a pounding, hard rock variant that evolved out of the mid-1960s garage-punk movement. ... When rock began turning back to softer, roots-oriented sounds in late 1968, acid-rock bands mutated into heavy metal acts." [125] One of the most influential bands in forging the merger of psychedelic rock and acid rock with the blues rock genre was the British power trio Cream , who derived a massive, heavy sound from unison riffing between guitarist Eric Clapton and bassist Jack Bruce , as well as Ginger Baker 's double bass drumming. [126] Their first two LPs – Fresh Cream (1966) and Disraeli Gears (1967) – are regarded as essential prototypes for the future style of heavy metal. The Jimi Hendrix Experience 's debut album, Are You Experienced (1967), was also highly influential. Hendrix 's virtuosic technique would be emulated by many metal guitarists, and the album's most successful single, " Purple Haze ", is identified by some as the first heavy metal hit. [30] Vanilla Fudge , whose first album also came out in 1967, has been called "one of the few American links between psychedelia and what soon became heavy metal," [127] and the band has been cited as an early American heavy metal group. [128] On their self-titled debut album, Vanilla Fudge created "loud, heavy, slowed-down arrangements" of contemporary hit songs, blowing these songs up to "epic proportions" and "bathing them in a trippy, distorted haze". [127] During the late 1960s, many psychedelic singers, such as Arthur Brown , began to create outlandish, theatrical, and often macabre performances that influenced many metal acts. [129] [130] [131] The American psychedelic rock band Coven , who opened for early heavy metal influencers such as Vanilla Fudge and the Yardbirds, portrayed themselves as practitioners of witchcraft or black magic , using dark – Satanic or occult – imagery in their lyrics, album art and live performances, which consisted of elaborate, theatrical " Satanic rites ". Coven's 1969 debut album, Witchcraft Destroys Minds & Reaps Souls , featured imagery of skulls, black masses , inverted crosses , and Satan worship, and both the album artwork and the band's live performances marked the first appearances in rock music of the sign of the horns , which would later become an important gesture in heavy metal culture. [132] [133] Coven's lyrical and thematic influences on heavy metal were quickly overshadowed by the darker and heavier sounds of Black Sabbath . [132] [133] Origins: late 1960s and early 1970s John Kay of Steppenwolf Critics disagree over who can be thought of as the first heavy metal band. Most credit the British bands Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath , with American commentators tending to favour Led Zeppelin and British commentators tending to favour Black Sabbath, though many give equal credit to both. Deep Purple , the third band in what is sometimes considered the "unholy trinity" of heavy metal along with Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath, fluctuated between many rock styles until late 1969 when they took a heavy metal direction. [134] A few commentators – mainly American – argue for other groups, including Iron Butterfly , Steppenwolf , Blue Cheer , or Vanilla Fudge , as the first to play heavy metal. [135] In 1968, the sound that would become known as heavy metal began to coalesce. That January, San Francisco band Blue Cheer released a cover of Eddie Cochran 's classic " Summertime Blues " as a part of their debut album, Vincebus Eruptum , and many consider it to be the first true heavy metal recording. [136] [137] The same month, Steppenwolf released their self-titled debut album , on which the track " Born to Be Wild " refers to "heavy metal thunder" in describing a motorcycle. In July, the Jeff Beck Group , whose leader had preceded Page as The Yardbirds' guitarist, released its debut record, Truth , which featured some of the "most molten, barbed, downright funny noises of all time", breaking ground for generations of metal ax-slingers. [138] In September, Page's new band, Led Zeppelin , made its live debut in Denmark (but were billed as The New Yardbirds). [139] The Beatles ' self-titled double album , released in November, included " Helter Skelter ", then one of the heaviest-sounding songs ever released by a major band. [140] The Pretty Things ' rock opera S.F. Sorrow , released in December, featured "proto heavy metal" songs such as "Old Man Going" and "I See You". [141] [142] Iron Butterfly 's 1968 song " In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida " is sometimes described as an example of the transition between acid rock and heavy metal [143] or the turning point in which acid rock became "heavy metal", [144] and both Iron Butterfly's 1968 album In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida and Blue Cheer's 1968 album Vincebus Eruptum have been described as laying the foundation of heavy metal and greatly influential in the transformation of acid rock into heavy metal. [145] In this counterculture period, MC5 , who began as part of the Detroit garage rock scene, developed a raw, distorted style that has been seen as a major influence on the future sound of both heavy metal and later punk music . [146] [147] The Stooges also began to establish and influence a heavy metal and later punk sound, with songs such as " I Wanna Be Your Dog ", featuring pounding and distorted heavy guitar power chord riffs. [148] Pink Floyd released two of their heaviest and loudest songs to date, " Ibiza Bar " and " The Nile Song ", the latter of which being regarded as "one of the heaviest songs the band recorded." [149] [150] King Crimson 's debut album started with " 21st Century Schizoid Man ", which was considered heavy metal by several critics. [151] [152] Led Zeppelin performing at Chicago Stadium in January 1975 In January 1969, Led Zeppelin's self-titled debut album was released and reached No. 10 on the Billboard album chart. In July, Led Zeppelin and a power trio with a Cream-inspired, but cruder sound, called Grand Funk Railroad played the Atlanta Pop Festival . That same month, another Cream-rooted trio led by Leslie West released Mountain , an album filled with heavy blues rock guitar and roaring vocals. In August, the group – now itself dubbed Mountain – played an hour-long set at the Woodstock Festival , exposing the crowd of 300,000 people to the emerging sound of heavy metal. [153] [154] Mountain's proto-metal or early heavy metal hit song " Mississippi Queen " from the album Climbing! is especially credited with paving the way for heavy metal and was one of the first heavy guitar songs to receive regular play on radio. [153] [155] [156] In September 1969, the Beatles released the album Abbey Road containing the track " I Want You (She's So Heavy) ", which has been credited as an early example of or influence on heavy metal or doom metal . [157] [158] In October 1969, British band High Tide debuted with the heavy, proto-metal album Sea Shanties . [159] [144] Led Zeppelin defined central aspects of the emerging genre, with Page's highly distorted guitar style and singer Robert Plant 's dramatic, wailing vocals. [160] Other bands, with a more consistently heavy, "purely" metal sound, would prove equally important in codifying the genre. The 1970 releases by Black Sabbath ( Black Sabbath , which is generally accepted as the first heavy metal album, [161] and Paranoid ) and Deep Purple ( Deep Purple in Rock ) were crucial in this regard. [119] Birmingham 's Black Sabbath had developed a particularly heavy sound in part due to a work accident in which guitarist Tony Iommi lost the ends of two fingers. [162] Unable to play normally, Iommi had to tune his guitar down for easier fretting and rely on power chords with their relatively simple fingering. [163] The bleak, industrial, working-class environment of Birmingham , a manufacturing city full of noisy factories and metalworking , has itself been credited with influencing Black Sabbath's heavy, chugging, metallic sound – and the sound of heavy metal in general. [164] [165] [166] [167] Deep Purple had fluctuated between styles in its early years, but by 1969, vocalist Ian Gillan and guitarist Ritchie Blackmore had led the band toward the developing heavy metal style. [134] In 1970, Black Sabbath and Deep Purple scored major U.K. chart hits with " Paranoid " and " Black Night ", respectively. [168] [169] That same year, two other British bands released debut albums in a heavy metal mode: Uriah Heep with ... Very 'Eavy ... Very 'Umble and UFO with UFO 1 . Bloodrock released their self-titled debut album , a collection of heavy guitar riffs, gruff style vocals and sadistic and macabre lyrics. [170] The influential Budgie brought the new metal sound into a power trio context, creating some of the heaviest music of the time. [171] The occult lyrics and imagery employed by Black Sabbath and Uriah Heep would prove particularly influential; Led Zeppelin also began foregrounding such elements with its fourth album , released in 1971. [172] In 1973, Deep Purple released the song " Smoke on the Water ", whose iconic riff is usually considered as the most recognizable one in "heavy rock" history, as a single of the classic live album Made in Japan . [173] [174] Brian Robertson , Phil Lynott , Scott Gorham of Thin Lizzy performing during the Bad Reputation Tour, 24 November 1977 On the other side of the Atlantic, the trendsetting group was Grand Funk Railroad , who was described as "the most commercially successful American heavy-metal band from 1970 until they disbanded in 1976, [they] established the Seventies success formula: continuous touring." [175] Other influential bands identified with metal emerged in the U.S. such as Sir Lord Baltimore ( Kingdom Come , 1970), Blue Öyster Cult ( Blue Öyster Cult , 1972), Aerosmith ( Aerosmith , 1973) and Kiss ( Kiss , 1974). Sir Lord Baltimore's 1970 debut album and both Humble Pie 's debut and self-titled third album were among the first albums to be described in print as "heavy metal", with As Safe As Yesterday Is referred to by the term "heavy metal" in a 1970 review in Rolling Stone magazine. [176] [177] [101] [100] Various smaller bands from the U.S., U.K. and Continental Europe – including Bang , Josefus , Leaf Hound , Primeval , Hard Stuff , Truth and Janey , Dust , JPT Scare Band , Frijid Pink , Cactus , Irish Coffee , May Blitz , Captain Beyond , Toad , Granicus , Iron Claw , and Yesterday's Children – though lesser known outside of their respective scenes, proved to be greatly influential on the emerging metal movement. In Germany, Scorpions debuted with Lonesome Crow in 1972. Blackmore, who had emerged as a virtuoso soloist with Deep Purple's highly influential album Machine Head (1972), left the band in 1975 to form Rainbow with Ronnie James Dio , singer and bassist for blues rock band Elf and future vocalist for Black Sabbath and heavy metal band Dio . Rainbow with Ronnie James Dio would expand on the mystical and fantasy -based lyrics and themes sometimes found in heavy metal, pioneering both power metal and neoclassical metal . [178] These bands also built audiences via constant touring and increasingly elaborate stage shows. [119] There are arguments about whether these and other early bands truly qualify as "heavy metal" or simply as "hard rock". Those closer to the music's blues roots or placing greater emphasis on melody are now commonly ascribed the latter label. AC/DC , which debuted with High Voltage in 1975, is a prime example. The 1983 Rolling Stone encyclopedia entry begins, "Australian heavy-metal band AC/DC ..." [179] Rock historian Clinton Walker wrote, "Calling AC/DC a heavy metal band in the seventies was as inaccurate as it is today. ... [They] were a rock 'n' roll band that just happened to be heavy enough for metal." [180] The issue is not only one of shifting definitions, but also a persistent distinction between musical style and audience identification; Ian Christe describes how the band "became the stepping-stone that led huge numbers of hard rock fans into heavy metal perdition". [181] In certain cases, there is little debate. After Black Sabbath, the next major example is Britain's Judas Priest , which debuted with Rocka Rolla in 1974. In Christe's description, Black Sabbath's audience was ... left to scavenge for sounds with similar impact. By the mid-1970s, heavy metal aesthetic could be spotted, like a mythical beast, in the moody bass and complex dual guitars of Thin Lizzy , in the stagecraft of Alice Cooper , in the sizzling guitar and showy vocals of Queen , and in the thundering medieval questions of Rainbow. ... Judas Priest arrived to unify and amplify these diverse highlights from hard rock's sonic palette. For the first time, heavy metal became a true genre unto itself. [182] Though Judas Priest did not have a top 40 album in the United States until 1980, for many it was the definitive post-Sabbath heavy metal band; its twin-guitar attack, featuring rapid tempos and a non-bluesy, more cleanly metallic sound, was a major influence on later acts. [5] While heavy metal was growing in popularity, most critics were not enamored of the music. Objections were raised to metal's adoption of visual spectacle and other trappings of commercial artifice, [183] but the main offense was its perceived musical and lyrical vacuity: reviewing a Black Sabbath album in the early 1970s, Robert Christgau described it as "dull and decadent ... dim-witted, amoral exploitation." [184] Mainstream: late 1970s and 1980s Iron Maiden , one of the central bands in the new wave of British heavy metal Punk rock emerged in the mid-1970s as a reaction against contemporary social conditions as well as what was perceived as the overindulgent, overproduced rock music of the time, including heavy metal. Sales of heavy metal records declined sharply in the late 1970s in the face of punk, disco and more mainstream rock. [183] With the major labels fixated on punk, many newer British heavy metal bands were inspired by the movement's aggressive, high-energy sound and " lo-fi ", do it yourself ethos. Underground metal bands began putting out cheaply recorded releases independently to small, devoted audiences. [185] Motörhead , founded in 1975, was the first important band to straddle the punk/metal divide. With the explosion of punk in 1977, others followed. British music magazines such as the NME and Sounds took notice, with Sounds writer Geoff Barton christening the movement the "New Wave of British Heavy Metal". [186] NWOBHM bands including Iron Maiden , Saxon and Def Leppard re-energized the heavy metal genre. Following the lead set by Judas Priest and Motörhead, they toughened up the sound, reduced its blues elements and emphasized increasingly fast tempos. [187] "This seemed to be the resurgence of heavy metal," noted Ronnie James Dio , who joined Black Sabbath in 1979. "I've never thought there was a desurgence of heavy metal – if that's a word! – but it was important to me that, yet again [after Rainbow ], I could be involved in something that was paving the way for those who are going to come after me." [188] By 1980, the NWOBHM had broken into the mainstream, as albums by Iron Maiden and Saxon, as well as Motörhead, reached the British top 10. Though less commercially successful, NWOBHM bands such as Venom and Diamond Head would have a significant influence on metal's development. [189] In 1981, Motörhead became the first of this new breed of metal bands to top the U.K. charts with the live album No Sleep 'til Hammersmith . [190] The first generation of metal bands was ceding the limelight. Deep Purple broke up soon after Blackmore's departure in 1975, and Led Zeppelin split following drummer John Bonham 's death in 1980. Black Sabbath were plagued with infighting and substance abuse, while facing fierce competition from their opening band , Van Halen . [191] [192] Eddie Van Halen established himself as one of the leading metal guitarists of the era. His solo on " Eruption ", from the band's self-titled 1978 album , is considered a milestone. [193] Eddie Van Halen's sound even crossed over into pop music when his guitar solo was featured on the track " Beat It " by Michael Jackson , which reached No. 1 in the U.S. in February 1983. [194] Inspired by Van Halen's success, a metal scene began to develop in Southern California during the late 1970s. Based on the clubs of L.A.'s Sunset Strip , bands such as Mötley Crüe , Quiet Riot , Ratt and W.A.S.P. were influenced by traditional heavy metal of the 1970s. [195] These acts incorporated the theatrics (and sometimes makeup) of glam metal or "hair metal" bands such as Alice Cooper and Kiss. [196] Glam metal bands were often visually distinguished by long, overworked hairstyles accompanied by wardrobes which were sometimes considered cross-gender. The lyrics of these glam metal bands characteristically emphasized hedonism and wild behavior, including lyrics that involved sexual expletives and the use of narcotics. [197] In the wake of the New Wave of British Heavy Metal and Judas Priest's breakthrough with British Steel (1980), heavy metal became increasingly popular in the early 1980s. Many metal artists benefited from the exposure they received on MTV , which began airing in 1981; sales often soared if a band's videos screened on the channel. [198] Def Leppard's videos for Pyromania (1983) made them superstars in America, and Quiet Riot became the first domestic heavy metal band to top the Billboard chart with Metal Health (1983). One of the seminal events in metal's growing popularity was the 1983 US Festival in California, where the "heavy metal day" featuring Ozzy Osbourne, Van Halen, Scorpions, Mötley Crüe, Judas Priest and others drew the largest audiences of the three-day event. [199] Between 1983 and 1984, heavy metal's share of all recordings sold in the U.S. increased from 8% to 20%. [200] Several major professional magazines devoted to the genre were launched, including Kerrang! in 1981 and Metal Hammer in 1984, as well as a host of fan journals. In 1985, Billboard declared: "Metal has broadened its audience base. Metal music is no longer the exclusive domain of male teenagers. The metal audience has become older (college-aged), younger (pre-teen), and more female." [201] By the mid-1980s, glam metal was a dominant presence on the U.S. charts, music television and the arena concert circuit. New bands such as L.A.'s Warrant and acts from the East Coast like Poison and Cinderella became major draws, while Mötley Crüe and Ratt remained very popular. Bridging the stylistic gap between hard rock and glam metal, New Jersey 's Bon Jovi became enormously successful with its third album, Slippery When Wet (1986). The similarly styled Swedish band Europe became international stars with The Final Countdown (1986), whose title track hit No. 1 in 25 countries. [202] In 1987, MTV launched Headbangers Ball , a show devoted exclusively to heavy metal videos. However, the metal audience had begun to factionalize, with those in many underground metal scenes favoring more extreme sounds and disparaging the popular style as "light metal" or "hair metal". [203] One band that reached diverse audiences was Guns N' Roses . In contrast to their glam metal contemporaries in L.A., they were seen as much more raw and dangerous.[ citation needed ] With the release of their chart-topping album Appetite for Destruction in 1987, they "recharged and almost single-handedly sustained the Sunset Strip sleaze system for several years". [204] The following year, Jane's Addiction emerged from the same L.A. hard-rock club scene with their major-label debut, Nothing's Shocking . Reviewing the album, Steve Pond of Rolling Stone declared, "As much as any band in existence, Jane's Addiction is the true heir to Led Zeppelin." [205] The group was one of the first to be identified with the " alternative metal " trend that would come to the fore in the next decade. Meanwhile, new bands like New York City's Winger and New Jersey's Skid Row sustained the popularity of the glam metal style. [206] Other heavy metal genres: 1980s, 1990s and 2000s Drummer Eric Moore from crossover thrash band Suicidal Tendencies Many subgenres of heavy metal developed outside of the commercial mainstream during the 1980s, [207] such as crossover thrash . Several attempts have been made to map the complex world of underground metal, most notably by the editors of AllMusic , as well as critic Garry Sharpe-Young . Sharpe-Young's multivolume metal encyclopedia separates the underground into five major categories: thrash metal , death metal , black metal , power metal and the related subgenres of doom and gothic metal . [208] In 1990, a review in Rolling Stone suggested retiring the term "heavy metal" as the genre was "ridiculously vague". [209] The article stated that the term only fueled "misperceptions of rock & roll bigots who still assume that five bands as different as Ratt , Extreme , Anthrax , Danzig and Mother Love Bone " sound the same. [209] Thrash metal Further information: thrash metal Thrash metal band Slayer performing in 2007 in front of a wall of speaker stacks Thrash metal emerged in the early 1980s under the influence of hardcore punk and the New Wave of British Heavy Metal, [210] particularly songs in the revved-up style known as speed metal . The movement began in the United States, with Bay Area thrash metal being the leading scene. The sound developed by thrash groups was faster and more aggressive than that of the original metal bands and their glam metal successors. [210] Low-register guitar riffs are typically overlaid with shredding leads. Lyrics often express nihilistic views or deal with social issues using visceral, gory language. Thrash has been described as a form of "urban blight music" and "a palefaced cousin of rap". [211] The subgenre was popularized by the "Big Four of Thrash": Metallica , Anthrax , Megadeth and Slayer . [212] Three German bands, Kreator , Sodom and Destruction , played a central role in bringing the style to Europe. Others, including the San Francisco Bay Area's Testament and Exodus , New Jersey's Overkill , and Brazil's Sepultura and Sarcófago , also had a significant impact. Although thrash metal began as an underground movement, and remained largely that for almost a decade, the leading bands of the scene began to reach a wider audience. Metallica brought the sound into the top 40 of the Billboard album chart in 1986 with Master of Puppets , the genre's first Platinum record. [213] Two years later, the band's album ... And Justice for All hit No. 6, while Megadeth and Anthrax also had top 40 records on the American charts. [214] Though less commercially successful than the rest of the Big Four, Slayer released one of the genre's definitive records: Reign in Blood (1986) was credited for incorporating heavier guitar timbres and including explicit depictions of death, suffering, violence and occult into thrash metal's lyricism. [215] Slayer attracted a following among far-right skinheads , and accusations of promoting violence and Nazi themes have dogged the band. [216] Even though Slayer did not receive substantial media exposure, their music played a key role in the development of extreme metal . [217] In the early 1990s, bands that got their start in thrash metal achieved breakout success, challenging and redefining the metal mainstream. [218] Metallica's self-titled 1991 album topped the Billboard chart, [219] as the band established an international following. [220] Megadeth's Countdown to Extinction (1992) debuted at No. 2, [221] Anthrax and Slayer cracked the top 10, [222] and albums by regional bands such as Testament and Sepultura entered the top 100. [223] Death metal Further information: death metal Death 's Chuck Schuldiner , "widely recognized as the father of death metal" [224] Thrash metal soon began to evolve and split into more extreme metal genres. "Slayer's music was directly responsible for the rise of death metal," according to MTV News. [225] The NWOBHM band Venom was also an important progenitor. The death metal movement in both North America and Europe adopted and emphasized the elements of blasphemy and diabolism employed by such acts. Florida's Death , San Francisco Bay Area's Possessed and Ohio's Necrophagia [226] are recognized as seminal bands in the style. All three have been credited with inspiring the subgenre's name. Possessed in particular did so via their 1984 demo, Death Metal, and their song "Death Metal", which came from their 1985 debut album, Seven Churches . In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Swedish death metal became notable and melodic forms of death metal were created. [227] Death metal utilizes the speed and aggression of both thrash and hardcore, fused with lyrics preoccupied with Z-grade slasher movie violence and Satanism . [228] Death metal vocals are typically bleak, involving guttural " death growls ", high-pitched screaming , the "death rasp" [229] and other uncommon techniques. [230] Complementing the deep, aggressive vocal style are down-tuned, heavily distorted guitars [228] [229] and extremely fast percussion, often with rapid double bass drumming and "wall of sound"–style blast beats . Frequent tempo and time signature changes and syncopation are also typical. [231] Death metal, like thrash metal, generally rejects the theatrics of earlier metal styles, opting instead for an everyday look of ripped jeans and plain leather jackets. [232] One major exception to this rule was Deicide 's Glen Benton , who branded an inverted cross on his forehead and wore armor on stage. Morbid Angel adopted neo-fascist imagery. [232] These two bands, along with Death and Obituary , were leaders of the major death metal scene that emerged in Florida in the mid-1980s. In the U.K., the related style of grindcore , led by bands such as Napalm Death and Extreme Noise Terror , emerged from the anarcho-punk movement. [228] Black metal Further information: black metal The first wave of black metal emerged in Europe in the early and mid-1980s, led by the United Kingdom's Venom , Denmark's Mercyful Fate , Switzerland's Hellhammer and Celtic Frost , and Sweden's Bathory . By the late 1980s, Norwegian bands such as Mayhem and Burzum were heading a second wave. [233] Black metal varies considerably in style and production quality, although most bands emphasize shrieked and growled vocals, highly distorted guitars frequently played with rapid tremolo picking , a dark atmosphere [230] and intentionally lo-fi production, often with ambient noise and background hiss. [234] Satanic themes are common in black metal, though many bands take inspiration from ancient paganism , promoting a return to supposed pre-Christian values. [235] Numerous black metal bands also "experiment with sounds from all possible forms of metal, folk, classical music, electronica and avant-garde". [229] Darkthrone drummer Fenriz explained: "It had something to do with production, lyrics, the way they dressed and a commitment to making ugly, raw, grim stuff. There wasn't a generic sound." [236] Although bands such as Sarcófago had been donning corpsepaint , by 1990, Mayhem was regularly wearing it; many other black metal acts also adopted the look. Bathory inspired the Viking metal and folk metal movements, and Immortal brought blast beats to the fore. Some bands in the Scandinavian black metal scene became associated with considerable violence in the early 1990s, [237] with Mayhem and Burzum linked to church burnings. Growing commercial hype around death metal generated a backlash; beginning in Norway, much of the Scandinavian metal underground shifted to support a black metal scene that resisted being co-opted by the commercial metal industry. [238] By 1992, black metal scenes had begun to emerge in areas outside Scandinavia, including Germany, France and Poland. [239] The 1993 murder of Mayhem's Euronymous by Burzum's Varg Vikernes provoked intensive media coverage. [236] Around 1996, when many in the scene felt the genre was stagnating, [240] several key bands, including Burzum and Finland's Beherit , moved toward an ambient style, while symphonic black metal was explored by Sweden's Tiamat and Switzerland's Samael . [241] In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Norway's Dimmu Borgir and England's Cradle of Filth brought black metal closer to the mainstream. [242] [243] Power metal Further information: power metal Italian band Rhapsody of Fire performing in Buenos Aires in 2010 During the late 1980s, the power metal scene came together largely in reaction to the harshness of death and black metal. [244] Though a relatively underground style in North America, it enjoys wide popularity in Europe, Japan and South America. Power metal focuses on upbeat, epic melodies and themes that "appeal to the listener's sense of valor and loveliness". [245] The prototype for the sound was established in the mid- to late 1980s by Germany's Helloween , who, in their 1987 and 1988 Keeper of the Seven Keys albums, combined the power riffs, melodic approach and a high-pitched, "clean" singing style of bands like Judas Priest and Iron Maiden with thrash's speed and energy, "crystalliz[ing] the sonic ingredients of what is now known as power metal". [246] Traditional power metal bands like Sweden's HammerFall , England's DragonForce and the U.S.'s Iced Earth have a sound clearly indebted to the classic NWOBHM style. [247] Many power metal bands such as the U.S.'s Kamelot , Finland's Nightwish , Stratovarius and Sonata Arctica , Italy's Rhapsody of Fire and Russia's Catharsis feature a keyboard-based "symphonic" sound , sometimes employing orchestras and opera singers. Power metal has built a strong fanbase in Japan and South America, where bands like Brazil's Angra and Argentina's Rata Blanca are popular. [248] Closely related to power metal is progressive metal , which adopts the complex compositional approach of bands like Rush and King Crimson . This style emerged in the United States in the early and mid-1980s, with innovators such as Queensrÿche , Fates Warning and Dream Theater . The mix of the progressive and power metal sounds is typified by New Jersey's Symphony X , whose guitarist Michael Romeo is among the most recognized of latter-day shredders. [249] Doom metal Further information: doom metal Emerging in the mid-1980s with such bands as California's Saint Vitus , Maryland's The Obsessed , Chicago's Trouble and Sweden's Candlemass , the doom metal movement rejected other metal styles' emphasis on speed, slowing its music to a crawl. Doom metal traces its roots to the lyrical themes and musical approach of early Black Sabbath. [250] The Melvins have also been a significant influence on doom metal and a number of its subgenres. [251] Doom metal emphasizes melody, melancholy tempos and a sepulchral mood relative to many other varieties of metal. [252] The 1991 release of Forest of Equilibrium , the debut album by U.K. band Cathedral , helped spark a new wave of doom metal. During the same period, the doom-death fusion style of British bands Paradise Lost , My Dying Bride and Anathema gave rise to European gothic metal . [253] with its signature dual-vocalist arrangements, exemplified by Norway's Theatre of Tragedy and Tristania . New York's Type O Negative introduced an American take on the style. [254] In the United States, sludge metal , which mixes doom metal and hardcore punk, emerged in the late 1980s; Eyehategod and Crowbar were leaders in a major Louisiana sludge scene . Early in the next decade, California's Kyuss and Sleep , inspired by the earlier doom metal bands, spearheaded the rise of stoner metal , [255] while Seattle's Earth helped develop the drone metal subgenre. [256] The late 1990s saw new bands form such as the Los Angeles–based Goatsnake , with a classic stoner/doom sound, and Sunn O))) , which crosses lines between doom, drone and dark ambient metal; the New York Times has compared their sound to an " Indian raga in the middle of an earthquake". [252] 1990s and early 2000s subgenres and fusions Layne Staley of Alice in Chains , one of the most popular acts identified with alternative metal , performing in 1992 The era of heavy metal's mainstream dominance in North America came to an end in the early 1990s with the emergence of Nirvana and other grunge bands, signaling the popular breakthrough of alternative rock . [257] Grunge acts were influenced by the heavy metal sound, but rejected the excesses of the more popular metal bands, such as their "flashy and virtuosic solos" and "appearance-driven" MTV orientation. [206] Glam metal fell out of favor due not only to the success of grunge, [258] but also because of the growing popularity of the more aggressive sound typified by Metallica and the post-thrash groove metal of Pantera and White Zombie . [259] In 1991, Metallica released their album Metallica , also known as The Black Album, which moved the band's sound out of the thrash metal genre and into standard heavy metal. [260] The album was certified 16× Platinum by the RIAA . [261] A few new, unambiguously metal bands had commercial success during the first half of the decade – Pantera's Far Beyond Driven topped the Billboard chart in 1994 – but, "In the dull eyes of the mainstream, metal was dead." [262] Some bands tried to adapt to the new musical landscape. Metallica revamped its image: the band members cut their hair and, in 1996, headlined the alternative music festival Lollapalooza , which was founded by Jane's Addiction singer Perry Farrell . While this prompted a backlash among some longtime fans, [263] Metallica remained one of the most successful bands in the world into the new century. [264] Italian gothic metal band Lacuna Coil performing in 2010 Like Jane's Addiction, many of the most popular early 1990s groups with roots in heavy metal fall under the umbrella term "alternative metal". [265] Bands in Seattle's grunge scene such as Soundgarden are credited for making a "place for heavy metal in alternative rock", [266] and Alice in Chains were at the center of the alternative metal movement. The label was applied to a wide spectrum of other acts that fused metal with different styles: Faith No More combined their alternative rock sound with punk, funk , metal and hip-hop ; Primus joined elements of funk, punk, thrash metal and experimental music ; Tool mixed metal and progressive rock ; bands such as Fear Factory , Ministry and Nine Inch Nails began incorporating metal into their industrial sound (and vice versa); and Marilyn Manson went down a similar route, while also employing shock effects of the sort popularized by Alice Cooper. Alternative metal artists, though they did not represent a cohesive scene, were united by their willingness to experiment with the metal genre and their rejection of glam metal aesthetics (with the stagecraft of Marilyn Manson and White Zombie – also identified with alt metal – significant, if partial, exceptions). [265] Alternative metal's mix of styles and sounds represented "the colorful results of metal opening up to face the outside world". [267] In the mid- and late 1990s came a new wave of U.S. metal groups inspired by the alternative metal bands and their mix of genres. [268] Dubbed "nu metal", bands such as Slipknot , Linkin Park , Limp Bizkit , Papa Roach , P.O.D. , Korn and Disturbed incorporated elements ranging from death metal to hip-hop, often including DJs and rap -style vocals. The mix demonstrated that "pancultural metal could pay off". [269] Nu metal gained mainstream success through heavy MTV rotation and Ozzy Osbourne's 1996 introduction of Ozzfest , which led the media to talk of a resurgence of heavy metal. [270] In 1999, Billboard noted that there were more than 500 specialty metal radio shows in the U.S., nearly three times as many as 10 years before. [271] While nu metal was widely popular, traditional metal fans did not fully embrace the style. [272] By early 2003, the movement's popularity was on the wane, though several nu metal acts such as Korn or Limp Bizkit retained substantial followings. [273] Recent styles: mid- to late 2000s, 2010s and 2020s "New metal" redirects here. For the genre of music with a similar name, see nu metal .
Toggle the table of contents Gospel music From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of music emphasizing Christian lyrics "Gospel (genre)" redirects here. For the literary genre, see Gospel . For the African-American musical genre, see Black Gospel music . Southern gospel Gospel music is a traditional genre of Christian music , and a cornerstone of Christian media . The creation, performance, significance, and even the definition of gospel music varies according to culture and social context. Gospel music is composed and performed for many purposes. Including aesthetic pleasure, religious or ceremonial purposes, and as an entertainment product for the marketplace. Gospel music is characterized by dominant vocals and strong use of harmony with Christian lyrics. Gospel music can be traced to the early 17th century. [1] Hymns and sacred songs were often performed in a call and response fashion, heavily influenced by ancestral African music. Most of the churches relied on hand-clapping and foot-stomping as rhythmic accompaniment. Most of the singing was done a cappella . [2] The first published use of the term "gospel song" appeared in 1874. The original gospel songs were written and composed by authors such as George F. Root , Philip Bliss , Charles H. Gabriel , William Howard Doane , and Fanny Crosby . [3] Gospel music publishing houses emerged. The advent of radio in the 1920s greatly increased the audience for gospel music. Following World War II , gospel music moved into major auditoriums, and gospel music concerts became quite elaborate. [4] Black and Southern gospel music are largely responsible for gospel's continued presence in contemporary Christian music , with soul music by far the best-known popular music variant. [5] The styles emerged from the African-American music and American folk music traditions and have evolved in various ways over the years, continuing to form the basis of Black church worship even today. It has also come to be used in churches of various other cultural traditions (especially within Pentecostalism ) and, via the gospel choir phenomenon spearheaded by Thomas Dorsey , has become a form of musical devotion worldwide. [6] Southern used all-male, tenor - lead - baritone - bass quartets. Progressive Southern gospel has grown out of Southern gospel over the past couple of decades. Christian country music , sometimes referred to as country gospel music, is a subgenre of gospel music with a country flair. It peaked in popularity in the mid-1990s. Bluegrass gospel music is rooted in American mountain music. Celtic gospel music infuses gospel music with a Celtic flair, and is quite popular in countries such as Ireland. British black gospel refers to Gospel music of the African diaspora produced in the United Kingdom. History[ edit ] According to Yale University music professor Willie Ruff, the singing of psalms in Scottish Gaelic by Presbyterians of the Scottish Hebrides evolved from " lining out "—where one person sang a solo and others followed—into the call and response of gospel music of the American South. [7] Another theory notes foundations in the works of Isaac Watts and others. [8] [ unreliable source? ] Moreover, the genre arose during a time when literacy was not a guarantee, utilizing a great deal of repetition (which, unlike more traditional hymns, allowed those who could not read the opportunity to participate).[ citation needed ] 18th century[ edit ] Perhaps the most famous gospel-based hymns were composed in the 1760s and 1770s by English writers John Newton (" Amazing Grace ") and Augustus Toplady ("Rock of Ages"), members of the Anglican Church . Starting out as lyrics only, it took decades for standardized tunes to be added to them. Although not directly connected with African-American gospel music, they were adopted by African-Americans as well as white Americans, and Newton's connection with the abolition movement provided cross-fertilization. Holiness-Pentecostal era (19th century)[ edit ] Philip Paul Bliss The first published use of the term "Gospel song" probably appeared in 1874 when Philip Bliss released a songbook entitled Gospel Songs. A Choice Collection of Hymns and Tunes. It was used to describe a new style of church music, songs that were easy to grasp and more easily singable than the traditional church hymns , which came out of the mass revival movement starting with Dwight L. Moody , whose musician was Ira D. Sankey , as well as the Holiness - Pentecostal movement. [3] Prior to the meeting of Moody and Sankey in 1870, there was an American rural/frontier history of revival and camp meeting songs, but the gospel hymn was of a different character, and it served the needs of mass revivals in the great cities. [9] The revival movement employed popular singers and song leaders, the most famous of them being Ira D. Sankey. The original "gospel" songs were written and composed by authors such as George F. Root , Philip Bliss , Charles H. Gabriel , William Howard Doane , and Fanny Crosby . [3] As an extension to his initial publication Gospel Songs, Philip Bliss, in collaboration with Ira D. Sankey issued no's. 1 to 6 of Gospel Hymns in 1875. [10] Sankey and Bliss's collection can be found in many libraries today. The popularity of revival singers and the openness of rural churches to this type of music (in spite of its initial use in city revivals) led to the late 19th and early 20th century establishment of gospel music publishing houses such as those of Homer Rodeheaver , E. O. Excell , Charlie Tillman , and Charles Tindley . These publishers were in the market for large quantities of new music, providing an outlet for the creative work of many songwriters and composers. [11] The advent of radio in the 1920s greatly increased the audience for gospel music, and James D. Vaughan used radio as an integral part of his business model, which also included traveling quartets to publicize the gospel music books he published several times a year. [12] Virgil O. Stamps and Jesse R. Baxter studied Vaughan's business model and by the late 1920s were running heavy competition for Vaughan. [13] The 1920s also saw the marketing of gospel records by groups such as the Carter Family . Emergence of Black gospel (1920s–1970s)[ edit ] Main article: Black Gospel music Mahalia Jackson has been called the "Queen of Gospel" The Pentecostal movement quickly made inroads with churches not attuned to the Europeanized Black church music that had become popular over the years since Emancipation. These congregations readily adopted and contributed to the gospel music publications of the early 20th century. Sister Rosetta Tharpe , pioneer of rock and roll , soon emerged from this tradition as the first great gospel recording artist. [14] The first person to introduce ragtime to gospel (and the first to play piano on a gospel recording) was Arizona Dranes . [15] The 1930s saw the rise of Black gospel quartets such as the Five Blind Boys of Mississippi and the Five Blind Boys of Alabama . [16] In addition to these high-profile quartets, there were many Black gospel musicians performing in the 1920s and 30s, usually playing the guitar and singing in the streets of Southern cities. In the 1930s, in Chicago, Thomas A. Dorsey turned to gospel music, establishing a publishing house. [4] It has been said that 1930 was the year traditional black gospel music began, as the National Baptist Convention first publicly endorsed the music at its 1930 meeting. [17] Dorsey was responsible for developing the musical careers of many African-American artists, such as Mahalia Jackson (best known for her rendition of his " Precious Lord, Take My Hand "). [4] Meanwhile, radio continued to develop an audience for gospel music, a fact that was commemorated in Albert E. Brumley 's 1937 song, "Turn Your Radio On" (which is still being published in gospel song books). (In 1972, a recording of " Turn Your Radio On " by the Lewis Family was nominated for Gospel Song of the Year .) [18] In 1964, the Gospel Music Association was established, which in turn began the Dove Awards (in 1969) and the Gospel Music Hall of Fame (in 1972). Both of the latter two groups began primarily for Southern gospel performers, but in the late 1970s, began including artists of other subgenres, which brought in many Black artists. [19] Also in 1969, James Cleveland established the Gospel Music Workshop of America , a Black gospel outlet. Late 20th-century musicians such as Elvis Presley , Jerry Lee Lewis , and the Blackwood Brothers were also known for their gospel influences and recordings. [13] Contemporary Black gospel and gospel rap (1970s–present)[ edit ] Main article: Urban contemporary gospel Urban contemporary gospel emerged in the late 1960s and early 70s with Walter Hawkins highly popular "Oh Happy Day" which is still performed worldwide in the 2000. Artists such as James Cleveland, Aretha Franklin, the Clark Sisters, Andraé Crouch and Richard Smallwood followed crossing over musically and gaining notoriety, and this pattern would repeat itself in subsequent decades, with new artists like Yolanda Adams and Kirk Franklin making increasingly more bold forays into the secular world with their musical stylings. The current sphere of Black gospel recording artists is almost exclusively of the urban contemporary bent. Also of note is the rise of Christian (or gospel) rap/hip-hop , which has gained increasing popularity since the days of the Gospel Gangstaz and The Cross Movement . Often considered a subgenre of urban contemporary gospel, Christian rap has become dominated in present times by artists from Reach Records , who have seen perhaps the most commercial success of any artists in the gospel genre; Lecrae (the label's founder and preeminent artist) has charted in the top 10 of on the Billboard 200 three times, with his 2014 album "Anomaly" debuting at No. 1.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Umbrella term for traditional or indigenous music not originating in Europe or North America For other uses, see World Music (disambiguation) . World music Etymology Coined early 1960s to describe non-European, non-North American music [1] "World music" is an English phrase for styles of music from non-Western countries, including quasi-traditional, intercultural , and traditional music .  World music's broad nature and elasticity as a musical category pose obstacles to a universal definition, but its ethic of interest in the culturally exotic is encapsulated in Roots magazine's description of the genre as "local music from out there". [1] [2] This music that does not follow "North American or British pop and folk traditions" [3] was given the term "world music" by music industries in Europe and North America. [4] The term was popularized in the 1980s as a marketing category for non-Western traditional music. [5] [6] It has grown to include subgenres such as ethnic fusion ( Clannad , Ry Cooder , Enya , etc.) [7] and worldbeat . [8] [9] Delhi 2 Dublin in 2012 The term "world music" has been credited to ethnomusicologist Robert E. Brown , who coined it in the early 1960s at Wesleyan University in Connecticut , where he developed undergraduate through doctoral programs in the discipline. To enhance the learning process (John Hill), he invited more than a dozen visiting performers from Africa and Asia and began a world music concert series. [10] [11] The term became current in the 1980s as a marketing/classificatory device in the media and the music industry . [12] There are several conflicting definitions for world music. One is that it consists of "all the music in the world", though such a broad definition renders the term virtually meaningless. [13] [14] Forms[ edit ] Alan Stivell in concert at Brest ( Brittany ), 2013 Examples of popular forms of world music include the various forms of non-European classical music (e.g. Chinese guzheng music, Indian raga music, Tibetan chants ), Eastern European folk music (e.g. the village music of the Balkans , The Mystery of the Bulgarian Voices ), Nordic folk music , Latin music , Indonesian music , and the many forms of folk and tribal music of the Middle East , Africa , Asia , Oceania , Central and South America . The broad category of world music includes isolated forms of ethnic music from diverse geographical regions. These dissimilar strains of ethnic music are commonly categorized together by virtue of their indigenous roots. Over the 20th century, the invention of sound recording , low-cost international air travel, and common access to global communication among artists and the general public have given rise to a related phenomenon called " crossover " music. Musicians from diverse cultures and locations could readily access recorded music from around the world, see and hear visiting musicians from other cultures and visit other countries to play their own music, creating a melting pot of stylistic influences. While communication technology allows greater access to obscure forms of music, the pressures of commercialization also present the risk of increasing musical homogeneity, the blurring of regional identities, and the gradual extinction of traditional local music-making practices. [15] Vampire Weekend performing at Red Rocks Amphitheatre in 2013 Since the music industry established this term, the fuller scope of what an average music consumer defines as "world" music in today's market has grown to include various blends of ethnic music tradition, style and interpretation, [9] and derivative world music genres have been coined to represent these hybrids, such as ethnic fusion and worldbeat . Good examples of hybrid, world fusion are the Irish - West African meld of Afro Celt Sound System , [16] the pan-cultural sound of AO Music [17] and the jazz / Finnish folk music of Värttinä , [18] each of which bear tinges of contemporary, Western influence—an increasingly noticeable element in the expansion genres of world music. Worldbeat and ethnic fusion can also blend specific indigenous sounds with more blatant elements of Western pop . Good examples are Paul Simon 's album Graceland , on which South African mbaqanga music is heard; Peter Gabriel 's work with Pakistani Sufi singer Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan ; the Deep Forest project, in which vocal loops from West Africa are blended with Western, contemporary rhythmic textures and harmony structure ; and the work of Mango , who combined pop and rock music with world elements. Depending on style and context, world music can sometimes share the new-age music genre, a category that often includes ambient music and textural expressions from indigenous roots sources. Good examples are Tibetan bowls , Tuvan throat singing , Gregorian chant or Native American flute music. World music blended with new-age music is a sound loosely classified as the hybrid genre 'ethnic fusion'. Examples of ethnic fusion are Nicholas Gunn 's "Face-to-Face" from Beyond Grand Canyon, featuring authentic Native American flute combined with synthesizers , and "Four Worlds" from The Music of the Grand Canyon, featuring spoken word from Razor Saltboy of the Navajo Indian Nation . World fusion[ edit ] Not to be confused with Ethno jazz . The subgenre world fusion is often mistakenly assumed to refer exclusively to a blending of Western jazz fusion elements with world music. Although such a hybrid expression falls easily into the world fusion category, the suffix "fusion" in the term world fusion should not be assumed to mean jazz fusion. Western jazz combined with strong elements of world music is more accurately termed world fusion jazz, [19] ethnic jazz or non-Western jazz. World fusion and global fusion are nearly synonymous with the genre term worldbeat , and though these are considered subgenres of popular music , they may also imply universal expressions of the more general term world music. [9] In the 1970s and 80s, fusion in the jazz music genre implied a blending of jazz and rock music , which is where the misleading assumption is rooted. [20] Popular genres[ edit ] Although it primarily describes traditional music, the world music category also includes popular music from non-Western urban communities (e.g. South African "township" music ) and non-European music forms that have been influenced by other so-called third-world musics (e.g. Afro-Cuban music ). [34] The inspiration of Zimbabwe's Thomas Mapfumo in blending the Mbira (finger Piano) style onto the electric guitar , saw a host of other Zimbabwean musicians refining the genre, none more successfully than The Bhundu Boys . The Bhundu Jit music hit Europe with some force in 1986, taking Andy Kershaw and John Peel fully under its spell. For many years, Paris has attracted numerous musicians from former colonies in West and North Africa . This scene is aided by the fact that there are many concerts and institutions that help to promote the music. Algerian and Moroccan music have an important presence in the French capital. Hundreds of thousands of Algerian and Moroccan immigrants have settled in Paris, bringing the sounds of Amazigh ( Berber ), raï , and Gnawa music . The West African music community is also very large, integrated by people from Senegal , Mali , Ivory Coast , and Guinea . Unlike musical styles from other regions of the globe, the American music industry tends to categorize Latin music as its own genre and defines it as any music sung in Spanish from the Spanish-speaking world . [35] Western[ edit ] The most common name for this form of music is also "folk music", but is often called "contemporary folk music" or "folk revival music" to make the distinction. [36] The transition was somewhat centered in the US and is also called the American folk music revival . [37] Fusion genres such as folk rock and others also evolved within this phenomenon. 1987 industry meeting[ edit ] Paul Simon had released a Southern African music-influenced album after falling in love with this music. On 29 June 1987, a meeting of interested parties gathered to capitalize on the marketing of non-Western folk music. Paul Simon had released the world music-influenced album Graceland in 1986. [38] The concept behind the album had been to express his own sensibilities using the sounds he had fallen in love with while listening to artists from Southern Africa , including Ladysmith Black Mambazo and Savuka . This project and the work of Peter Gabriel and Johnny Clegg among others had, to some degree, introduced non-Western music to a wider audience. They saw this as an opportunity. In an unprecedented move, all of the world music labels coordinated together and developed a compilation cassette for the cover of the music magazine NME . The overall running time was 90 minutes, each package containing a mini-catalog showing the other releases on offer. By the time of a second meeting it became clear that a successful campaign required its own dedicated press officer. The press officer would be able to juggle various deadlines and sell the music as a concept—not just to national stations, but also regional DJs keen to expand their musical variety. DJs were a key resource as it was important to make "world music" important to people outside London—most regions after all had a similarly heritage to tap into. A cost-effective way of achieving all this would be a leafleting campaign. The next step was to develop a world music chart, gathering together selling information from around fifty shops, so that it would finally be possible to see which were big sellers in the genre—so new listeners could see what was particularly popular. It was agreed that the NME could again be involved in printing the chart and also Music Week and the London listings magazine City Limits . It was also suggested that Andy Kershaw might be persuaded to do a run down of this chart on his show regularly. Relationship to immigration and multiculturalism[ edit ] Further information: Music of Canadian cultures This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style . (September 2021) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) In most wealthy industrialized countries, large amounts of immigration from other regions has been ongoing for many decades. This has introduced non-Western music to Western audiences not only as "exotic" imports, but also as local music played by fellow citizens. But the process is ongoing and continues to produce new forms. In the 2010s several musicians from immigrant communities in the West rose to global popularity, such as Haitian-American Wyclef Jean , Somali-Canadian K'naan , Tamil -Briton M.I.A. , often blending the music of their heritage with hip-hop or pop. Cuban-born singer-songwriter Addys Mercedes started her international career from Germany mixing traditional elements of Son with pop. [39] Once, an established Western artist might collaborate with an established African artist to produce an album or two. Now, new bands and new genres are built from the ground up by young performers. For example, the Punjabi - Irish fusion band Delhi 2 Dublin is from neither India nor Ireland, but Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada. Country for Syria, an Istanbul based music collective, blends American country music with the music of Syrian refugees and local Turkish music. [40] Musicians and composers also work collectively to create original compositions for various combinations of western and non western instruments. The introduction of non-western music into western culture created a fusion that influenced both parties. (Feld 31) [41] With the quick demand for new music came the technicalities of ownership. As Feld states in page 31: [41] "This complex traffic in sounds money and media is rooted in the nature of revitalization through appropriation." There are collaborations between African and American popular music artists that raise questions on who is benefiting from said collaborations.(Feld 31) [41] Feld mentions the example of "That was your mother". Alton Rubin and his band the Twisters collaborated with Paul Simon on the song that possessed a zydeco feel, signature of Dopsie's band. Even though Paul Simon wrote and sang the lyrics with them, the whole copyright is attributed to Paul and not to the band as well. (Feld 34) [41] Because of crossovers like this one, where there was a disproportional gain when covering non-western music. Feld states that "...international music scene, where worldwide media contact, amalgamation of the music industry towards world record sales domination by three enormous companies, and extensive copyright controls by a few Western countries are having a riveting effect on the commodification of musical skill and styles, and on the power of musical ownership." (Feld 32) [41] Immigration also heavily influences world music, providing a variety of options for the wider public. In the 1970s Punjabi music was greatly popular in the UK because of its growing Punjabi diaspora. (Schreffler 347) [42] Bhangra music was also greatly covered by its diaspora in cities like New York and Chicago . (Schreffler 351) [42] For a more mainstream integration, the Punjabi music scene integrated collaborations with rappers and started gaining more recognition. One of these successful attempts was a remix of the song "Mundiān ton Bach ke" called "Beware of the Boys" by Panjabi MC featuring Jay Z. (Schreffler 354) [43] Collaborations between outsider artists provided an integration of their music, even with foreign instrumentation, into the popular music scene. Immigration, being a great part of music exportation, plays a big role in cultural identity. Immigrant communities use music to feel as if they are home and future generations it plays the role of educating or giving insight into what their culture is about. In Punjabi culture, music became the carrier of culture around the world. (Schreffler 355) [43] Radio programs[ edit ] World music radio programs today often play African hip hop or reggae artists, crossover Bhangra and Latin American jazz groups, etc. Common media for world music include public radio , webcasting , the BBC , NPR , and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation . By default, non-region-specific or multi-cultural world music projects are often listed under the generic category of world music.
psychedelic soul Funk is a music genre that originated in African-American communities in the mid-1960s when musicians created a rhythmic , danceable new form of music through a mixture of various music genres that were popular among African-Americans in the mid-20th century. It deemphasizes melody and chord progressions and focuses on a strong rhythmic groove of a bassline played by an electric bassist and a drum part played by a percussionist , often at slower tempos than other popular music. Funk typically consists of a complex percussive groove with rhythm instruments playing interlocking grooves that create a "hypnotic" and "danceable" feel. [3] It uses the same richly colored extended chords found in bebop jazz, such as minor chords with added sevenths and elevenths, and dominant seventh chords with altered ninths and thirteenths. Funk originated in the mid-1960s, with James Brown 's development of a signature groove that emphasized the downbeat —with a heavy emphasis on the first beat of every measure ("The One"), and the application of swung 16th notes and syncopation on all basslines, drum patterns, and guitar riffs. [4] Rock- and psychedelia -influenced musicians Sly and the Family Stone and Parliament-Funkadelic fostered more eclectic examples of the genre beginning in the late 1960s. [5] Other musical groups developed Brown's innovations during the 1970s and the 1980s, including Kool and the Gang , [6] Ohio Players , Fatback Band , Jimmy Castor Bunch, Earth, Wind & Fire , B.T. Express , Shalamar , [7] One Way, Lakeside , Dazz Band , The Gap Band , Slave , Aurra , Roger Troutman & Zapp , Con Funk Shun , Cameo , Bar-Kays and Chic . Funk derivatives include avant-funk , an avant-garde strain of funk; boogie , a hybrid of electronic music and funk; funk metal ; G-funk, a mix of gangsta rap and psychedelic funk ; Timba , a form of funky Cuban dance music; and funk jam. It is also the main influence of Washington go-go , a funk subgenre. [8] Funk samples and breakbeats have been used extensively in hip hop and electronic dance music . Etymology[ edit ] Look up funk in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. The word funk initially referred (and still refers) to a strong odor. It is originally derived from Latin "fumigare" (which means "to smoke") via Old French "fungiere" and, in this sense, it was first documented in English in 1620. In 1784, "funky" meaning "musty" was first documented, which, in turn, led to a sense of "earthy" that was taken up around 1900 in early jazz slang for something "deeply or strongly felt". [9] [10] Even though in white culture, the term "funk" can have negative connotations of odor or being in a bad mood ("in a funk"), in African communities, the term "funk", while still linked to body odor, had the positive sense that a musician's hard-working, honest effort led to sweat, and from their "physical exertion" came an "exquisite" and "superlative" performance. [11] In early jam sessions , musicians would encourage one another to " get down " by telling one another, "Now, put some stank on it!" At least as early as 1907, jazz songs carried titles such as Funky. The first example is an unrecorded number by Buddy Bolden , remembered as either "Funky Butt" or "Buddy Bolden's Blues", with improvised lyrics that were, according to Donald M. Marquis, either "comical and light" or "crude and downright obscene" but, in one way or another, referring to the sweaty atmosphere at dances where Bolden's band played. [12] [13] As late as the 1950s and early 1960s, when "funk" and "funky" were used increasingly in the context of jazz music , the terms still were considered indelicate and inappropriate for use in polite company. According to one source, New Orleans -born drummer Earl Palmer "was the first to use the word 'funky' to explain to other musicians that their music should be made more syncopated and danceable." [14] The style later evolved into a rather hard-driving, insistent rhythm, implying a more carnal quality. This early form of the music set the pattern for later musicians. [15] The music was identified as slow, sexy, loose, riff -oriented and danceable.[ citation needed ] The meaning of "funk" continues to captivate the genre of black music, feeling, and knowledge. Recent scholarship in black studies has taken the term "funk" in its many iterations to consider the range of black movement and culture. In particular, L.H. Stallings's Funk the Erotic: Transaesthetics and Black Sexual Cultures explores these multiple meanings of "funk" as a way to theorize sexuality, culture, and western hegemony within the many locations of "funk": "street parties, drama/theater, strippers and strip clubs, pornography, and self-published fiction." [16] Characteristics[ edit ] Rhythm and tempo[ edit ] The rhythm section of a funk band—the electric bass, drums, electric guitar and keyboards--is the heartbeat of the funk sound. Pictured here is the Meters . Like soul, funk is based on dance music , so it has a strong "rhythmic role". [17] The sound of funk is as much based on the "spaces between the notes" as the notes that are played; as such, rests between notes are important. [18] While there are rhythmic similarities between funk and disco , funk has a "central dance beat that's slower, sexier and more syncopated than disco", and funk rhythm section musicians add more "subtextures", complexity and "personality" onto the main beat than a programmed synth-based disco ensemble. [19] Before funk, most pop music was based on sequences of eighth notes, because the fast tempos made further subdivisions of the beat infeasible. [3] The innovation of funk was that by using slower tempos (surely influenced by the revival of blues at early 60s), funk "created space for further rhythmic subdivision, so a bar of 4/4 could now accommodate possible 16  note  placements." [3] Specifically, by having the guitar and drums play in "motoring" sixteenth-note rhythms, it created the opportunity for the other instruments to play "more syncopated, broken-up style", which facilitated a move to more "liberated" basslines. Together, these "interlocking parts" created a "hypnotic" and "danceable feel". [3] A great deal of funk is rhythmically based on a two- celled onbeat/offbeat structure, which originated in sub-Saharan African music traditions . New Orleans appropriated the bifurcated structure from the Afro-Cuban mambo and conga in the late 1940s, and made it its own. [20] New Orleans funk, as it was called, gained international acclaim largely because James Brown's rhythm section used it to great effect. [21] Simple kick and snare funk motif. The kick first sounds two onbeats, which are then answered by two offbeats. The snare sounds the backbeat. Harmony[ edit ] A thirteenth chord (E 13, which also contains a flat 7th and a 9th) Play ⓘ Funk uses the same richly colored extended chords found in bebop jazz, such as minor chords with added sevenths and elevenths, or dominant seventh chords with altered ninths. Some examples of chords used in funk are minor eleventh chords (e.g., F minor 11th); dominant seventh with added sharp ninth and a suspended fourth (e.g., C7 (#9) sus 4); dominant ninth chords (e.g., F9); and minor sixth chords (e.g., C minor 6). [18] The six-ninth chord is used in funk (e.g., F 6/9); it is a major chord with an added sixth and ninth. [18] In funk, minor seventh chords are more common than minor triads because minor triads were found to be too thin-sounding. [22] Some of the best known and most skillful soloists in funk have jazz backgrounds. Trombonist Fred Wesley and saxophonists Pee Wee Ellis and Maceo Parker are among the most notable musicians in the funk music genre, having worked with James Brown , George Clinton and Prince . Unlike bebop jazz, with its complex, rapid-fire chord changes, funk virtually abandoned chord changes, creating static single chord vamps (often alternating a minor seventh chord and a related dominant seventh chord, such as A minor to D7) with melodo-harmonic movement and a complex, driving rhythmic feel. Even though some funk songs are mainly one-chord vamps, the rhythm section musicians may embellish this chord by moving it up or down a semitone or a tone to create chromatic passing chords. For example, " Play That Funky Music " (by Wild Cherry ) mainly uses an E ninth chord, but it also uses F#9 and F9. [23] The chords used in funk songs typically imply a Dorian or Mixolydian mode , as opposed to the major or natural minor tonalities of most popular music. Melodic content was derived by mixing these modes with the blues scale . In the 1970s, jazz music drew upon funk to create a new subgenre of jazz-funk , which can be heard in recordings by Miles Davis ( Live-Evil , On the Corner ), and Herbie Hancock ( Head Hunters ). Improvisation[ edit ] Funk continues the African musical tradition of improvisation , in that in a funk band, the group would typically "feel" when to change, by "jamming" and "grooving", even in the studio recording stage, which might only be based on the skeleton framework for each song. [24] Funk uses "collective improvisation", in which musicians at rehearsals would have what was metaphorically a musical "conversation", an approach which extended to the onstage performances. [25] Bass Guitar[ edit ] Bootsy Collins performing in 1996 with a star-shaped bass Funk creates an intense groove by using strong guitar riffs and basslines played on electric bass . Like Motown recordings, funk songs use basslines as the centerpiece of songs. Indeed, funk has been called the style in which the bassline is most prominent in the songs, [26] with the bass playing the "hook" of the song. [27] Early funk basslines used syncopation (typically syncopated eighth notes), but with the addition of more of a "driving feel" than in New Orleans funk, and they used blues scale notes along with the major third above the root. [28] Later funk basslines use sixteenth note syncopation, blues scales, and repetitive patterns, often with leaps of an octave or a larger interval. [27] This funky bassline includes percussive slapping, rhythmic ghost notes, and glissando effects. Funk basslines emphasize repetitive patterns, locked-in grooves, continuous playing, and slap and popping bass. Slapping and popping uses a mixture of thumb-slapped low notes (also called "thumped") and finger "popped" (or plucked) high notes, allowing the bass to have a drum-like rhythmic role, which became a distinctive element of funk. Notable slap and funky players include Bernard Edwards ( Chic ), Robert "Kool" Bell , Mark Adams ( Slave ), Johnny Flippin ( Fatback ) [29] and Bootsy Collins . [30] While slap and funky is important, some influential bassists who play funk, such as Rocco Prestia (from Tower of Power ), did not use the approach, and instead used a typical fingerstyle method based on James Jamerson 's Motown playing style. [30] Larry Graham from Sly and the Family Stone is an influential bassist. [31] Funk bass has an "earthy, percussive kind of feel", in part due to the use of muted, rhythmic ghost notes [31] (also called "dead notes"). [30] Some funk bass players use electronic effects units to alter the tone of their instrument, such as "envelope filters" (an auto-wah effect that creates a "gooey, slurpy, quacky, and syrupy" sound) [32] and imitate keyboard synthesizer bass tones [33] (e.g., the Mutron envelope filter) [27] and overdriven fuzz bass effects, which are used to create the "classic fuzz tone that sounds like old school Funk records". [34] Other effects that are used include the flanger and bass chorus . [27] Collins also used a Mu-Tron Octave Divider , an octave pedal that, like the Octavia pedal popularized by Hendrix , can double a note an octave above and below to create a "futuristic and fat low-end sound". [35] Drums[ edit ] Funk drumming creates a groove by emphasizing the drummer's "feel and emotion", which including "occasional tempo fluctuations", the use of swing feel in some songs (e.g., "Cissy Strut" by The Meters and "I'll Take You There" by The Staple Singers , which have a half-swung feel), and less use of fills (as they can lessen the groove). [36] Drum fills are "few and economical", to ensure that the drumming stays "in the pocket", with a steady tempo and groove. [37] These playing techniques are supplemented by a set-up for the drum kit that often includes muffled bass drums and toms and tightly tuned snare drums. [36] Double bass drumming sounds are often done by funk drummers with a single pedal, an approach which "accents the second note... [and] deadens the drumhead's resonance", which gives a short, muffled bass drum sound. [36] The drum groove from " Cissy Strut " James Brown used two drummers such as Clyde Stubblefield and John 'Jabo' Starks in recording and soul shows. [38] By using two drummers, the JB band was able to maintain a "solid syncopated" rhythmic sound, which contributed to the band's distinctive "Funky Drummer" rhythm. [38] In Tower of Power drummer David Garibaldi 's playing, there are many ghost notes and rim shots . [36] A key part of the funk drumming style is using the hi-hat, with opening and closing the hi-hats during playing (to create "splash" accent effects) being an important approach. [39] Two-handed sixteenth notes on the hi-hats, sometimes with a degree of swing feel, is used in funk. [36] Jim Payne states that funk drumming uses a "wide-open" approach to improvisation around rhythmic ideas from Latin music, ostinatos , that are repeated "with only slight variations", an approach which he says causes the "mesmerizing" nature of funk. [40] Payne states that funk can be thought of as "rock played in a more syncopated manner", particularly with the bass drum, which plays syncopated eighth-note and sixteenth-note patterns that were innovated by drummer Clive Williams (with Joe Tex ); George Brown (with Kool & the Gang ) and James "Diamond" Williams (with The Ohio Players ). [41] As with rock, the snare provides backbeats in most funk (albeit with additional soft ghost notes). [40] Electric guitar[ edit ] In funk, guitarists often mix playing chords of a short duration (nicknamed "stabs") with faster rhythms and riffs. [17] Guitarists playing rhythmic parts often play sixteenth notes, including with percussive ghost notes. [17] Chord extensions are favored, such as ninth chords. [17] Typically, funk uses "two interlocking [electric] guitar parts", with a rhythm guitarist and a "tenor guitarist" who plays single notes. The two guitarists trade off their lines to create a " call-and-response , intertwined pocket." [42] If a band only has one guitarist, this effect may be recreated by overdubbing in the studio, or, in a live show, by having a single guitarist play both parts, to the degree that this is possible. [42] In funk bands, guitarists typically play in a percussive style, using a style of picking called the "chank" or "chicken scratch",  in which the guitar strings are pressed lightly against the fingerboard and then quickly released just enough to get a muted "scratching" sound that is produced by rapid rhythmic strumming of the opposite hand near the bridge . [43] Earliest examples of that technic used on rhythm and blues is listened on Johnny Otis song " Willie and the Hand Jive " in 1957, with the future James Brown band guitar player Jimmy Nolen . The technique can be broken down into three approaches: the "chika", the "chank" and the "choke". With the "chika" comes a muted sound of strings being hit against the fingerboard; "chank" is a staccato attack done by releasing the chord with the fretting hand after strumming it; and "choking" generally uses all the strings being strummed and heavily muted. [18] Guitarist Nile Rodgers is best known for his performances with Chic . The result of these factors was a rhythm guitar sound that seemed to float somewhere between the low-end thump of the electric bass and the cutting tone of the snare and hi-hats , with a rhythmically melodic feel that fell deep in the pocket. Guitarist Jimmy Nolen , longtime guitarist for James Brown, developed this technique. On Brown's " Give It Up or Turnit a Loose " (1969), however, Jimmy Nolen's guitar part has a bare bones tonal structure. The pattern of attack-points is the emphasis, not the pattern of pitches. The guitar is used the way that an African drum, or idiophone would be used. Nolen created a "clean, trebly tone" by using "hollow-body jazz guitars with single-coil P-90 pickups" plugged into a Fender Twin Reverb amp with the mid turned down low and the treble turned up high. [44] Funk guitarists playing rhythm guitar generally avoid distortion effects and amp overdrive to get a clean sound, and given the importance of a crisp, high sound, Fender Stratocasters and Telecasters were widely used for their cutting treble tone. [44] The mids are often cut by guitarists to help the guitar sound different from the horn section , keyboards and other instruments. [44] Given the focus on providing a rhythmic groove, and the lack of emphasis on instrumental guitar melodies and guitar solos , sustain is not sought out by funk rhythm guitarists. [44] Funk rhythm guitarists use compressor volume-control effects to enhance the sound of muted notes, which boosts the "clucking" sound and adds "percussive excitement to funk rhythms" (an approach used by Nile Rodgers ). [45] Guitarist Eddie Hazel from Funkadelic is notable for his solo improvisation (particularly for the solo on " Maggot Brain ") and guitar riffs, the tone of which was shaped by a Maestro FZ-1 Fuzz-Tone pedal. [35] Hazel, along with guitarist Ernie Isley of the Isley Brothers , was influenced by Jimi Hendrix 's improvised, wah-wah infused solos. Ernie Isley was tutored at an early age by Hendrix, when Hendrix was a part of the Isley Brothers backing band and temporarily lived in the Isleys' household. Funk guitarists use the wah-wah sound effect along with muting the notes to create a percussive sound for their guitar riffs. The phaser effect is often used in funk and R&B guitar playing for its filter sweeping sound effect, an example being the Isley Brothers ' song " Who's That Lady ". [46] Michael Hampton , another P-Funk guitarist, was able to play Hazel's virtuosic solo on "Maggot Brain", using a solo approach that added in string bends and Hendrix-style feedback . [35] Isaac Hayes playing keyboards in 1973 A range of keyboard instruments are used in funk. Acoustic piano is used in funk, including in "September" by Earth Wind & Fire and " Will It Go Round in Circles " by Billy Preston . The electric piano is used on songs such as Herbie Hancock 's "Chameleon" (a Fender Rhodes ) and "Mercy, Mercy, Mercy" by Joe Zawinul (a Wurlitzer ). The clavinet is used for its percussive tone, and it can be heard in songs such as Stevie Wonder 's " Superstition " and " Higher Ground " and Bill Withers' " Use Me ". The Hammond B-3 organ is used in funk, in songs such as "Cissy Strut" by The Meters and "Love the One You're With" (with Aretha Franklin singing and Billy Preston on keyboards). Bernie Worrell 's range of keyboards from his recordings with Parliament Funkadelic demonstrate the wide range of keyboards used in funk, as they include the Hammond organ ("Funky Woman", "Hit It and Quit It", "Wars of Armageddon"); RMI electric piano ("I Wanna Know If It's Good to You?", " Free Your Mind ", "Loose Booty"); acoustic piano ("Funky Dollar Bill", "Jimmy's Got a Little Bit of Bitch in Him"); clavinet ("Joyful Process", "Up for the Down Stroke", "Red Hot Mama"); Minimoog synthesizer ("Atmosphere", " Flash Light ", "Aqua Boogie", "Knee Deep", "Let's Take It to the Stage"); and ARP string ensemble synth (" Chocolate City ", " Give Up the Funk (Tear the Roof off the Sucker) ", "Undisco Kidd"). Synthesizers were used in funk both to add to the deep sound of the electric bass, or even to replace the electric bass altogether in some songs. [47] Funk synthesizer bass, most often a Minimoog , was used because it could create layered sounds and new electronic tones that were not feasible on electric bass. [47] Vocals and lyrics[ edit ] In the 1970s, funk used many of the same vocal styles that were used in African-American music in the 1960s, including singing influences from blues, gospel, jazz and doo-wop. [38] Like these other African-American styles, funk used "[y]ells, shouts, hollers, moans, humming, and melodic riffs", along with styles such as call and response and narration of stories (like the African oral tradition approach). [48] The call and response in funk can be between the lead singer and the band members who act as backup vocalists . [49] As funk emerged from soul, the vocals in funk share soul's approach; however, funk vocals tend to be "more punctuated, energetic, rhythmically percussive[,] and less embellished" with ornaments, and the vocal lines tend to resemble horn parts and have "pushed" rhythms. [50] Funk bands such as Earth, Wind & Fire have harmony vocal parts. [19] Songs like " Super Bad " by James Brown included "double-voice" along with "yells, shouts and screams". [51] Funk singers used a "black aesthetic" to perform that made use of "colorful and lively exchange of gestures, facial expressions, body posture, and vocal phrases" to create an engaging performance. [52] Singer Charlie Wilson The lyrics in funk music addressed issues faced by the African American community in the United States during the 1970s, which arose due to the move away from an industrial, working-class economy to an information economy, which harmed the Black working class. [53] Funk songs by The Ohio Players, Earth, Wind & Fire, and James Brown raised issues faced by lower-income Blacks in their song lyrics, such as poor "economic conditions and themes of poor inner-city life in the black communities". [54] The Funkadelic song " One Nation Under A Groove " (1978) is about the challenges that Blacks overcame during the 1960s civil rights movement, and it includes an exhortation for Blacks in the 1970s to capitalize on the new "social and political opportunities" that had become available in the 1970s. [55] The Isley Brothers song "Fight the Power" (1975) has a political message. [56] Parliament's song "Chocolate City" (1975) metaphorically refers to Washington, D.C., and other US cities that have a mainly Black population, and it draws attention to the potential power that Black voters wield and suggests that a Black President be considered in the future. [57] The political themes of funk songs and the aiming of the messages to a Black audience echoed the new image of Blacks that was created in Blaxploitation films, which depicted "African-American men and women standing their ground and fighting for what was right". [58] Both funk and Blaxploitation films addressed issues faced by Blacks and told stories from a Black perspective. [58] Another link between 1970s funk and Blaxploitation films is that many of these films used funk soundtracks (e.g., Curtis Mayfield for Superfly ; James Brown and Fred Wesley for Black Caesar and War for Youngblood ). [59] Funk songs included metaphorical language that was understood best by listeners who were "familiar with the black aesthetic and [black] vernacular". [60] For example, funk songs included expressions such as "shake your money maker", "funk yourself right out" and "move your boogie body". [61] Another example is the use of "bad" in the song "Super Bad" (1970), which black listeners knew meant "good" or "great". [49] In the 1970s, to get around radio obscenity restrictions, funk artists would use words that sounded like non-allowed words and double entendres to get around these restrictions. [62] For example, The Ohio Players had a song entitled "Fopp" which referred to "Fopp me right, don't you fopp me wrong/We'll be foppin' all night long...". [62] Some funk songs used made-up words which suggested that they were "writing lyrics in a constant haze of marijuana smoke", such as Parliament's " Aqua Boogie (A Psychoalphadiscobetabioaquadoloop) ", which includes words such as "bioaquadooloop". [62] The mainstream white listener base was often not able to understand funk's lyrical messages, which contributed to funk's lack of popular music chart success with white audiences during the 1970s. [63] Other instruments[ edit ] Horn section arrangements with groups of brass instruments are often used in funk songs. [19] Funk horn sections could include saxophone (often tenor sax), trumpet, trombone, and for larger horn sections, such as quintets and sextets, a baritone sax. [3] Horn sections played "rhythmic and syncopated" parts, often with "offbeat phrases" that emphasize "rhythmic displacement". [3] Funk song introductions are an important place for horn arrangements. [3] Funk horn sections typically include saxophones and trumpets. Larger horn sections often add a second instrument for one of the saxes or trumpets, and a trombone or bari sax may also be used. Pictured is the Earth, Wind and Fire horn section. Funk horn sections performed in a "rhythmic percussive style" that mimicked the approach used by funk rhythm guitarists. [64] Horn sections would "punctuate" the lyrics by playing in the spaces between vocals, using "short staccato rhythmic blast[s]". [64] Notable funk horn players included Alfred "PeeWee" Ellis , trombonist Fred Wesley , and alto sax player Maceo Parker . [64] Notable funk horn sections including the Phoenix Horns (with Earth, Wind & Fire), the Horny Horns (with Parliament), the Memphis Horns (with Isaac Hayes ), and MFSB (with Curtis Mayfield ). [64] The instruments in funk horn sections varied. If there were two horn players, it could be trumpet and sax, trumpet and trombone, or two saxes. [3] A standard horn trio would consist of trumpet, sax, and trombone, but trios of one trumpet with two saxes, or two trumpets with one sax, were also fairly common. [3] A quartet would be set up the same as a standard horn trio, but with an extra trumpet, sax, or (less frequently) trombone player. Quintets would either be a trio of saxes (typically alto/tenor/baritone, or tenor/tenor/baritone) with a trumpet and a trombone, or a pair each of trumpets and saxes with one trombone. With six instruments, the horn section would usually be two trumpets, three saxes, and a trombone. [3] Notable songs with funk horn sections include: " Cold Sweat " (James Brown & the Famous Flames), 1967 "Superstition" (Stevie Wonder), 1972 "Funky Stuff" (Kool & The Gang), 1973 "What Is Hip?" (Tower of Power), 1973
Blue disco quad roller skates . By the late 1970s, most major US cities had thriving disco club scenes. The largest scenes were most notably in New York City but also in Philadelphia , San Francisco , Miami , and Washington, D.C. The scene was centered on discotheques , nightclubs and private loft parties. In the 1970s, notable discos included " Crisco Disco ", "The Sanctuary", "Leviticus", " Studio 54 ", and " Paradise Garage " in New York, "Artemis" in Philadelphia, "Studio One" in Los Angeles, "Dugan's Bistro" in Chicago, and "The Library" in Atlanta. [26] [27] In the late '70s, Studio 54 in Midtown Manhattan was arguably the best-known nightclub in the world. This club played a major formative role in the growth of disco music and nightclub culture in general. It was operated by Steve Rubell and Ian Schrager and was notorious for the hedonism that went on within: the balconies were known for sexual encounters and drug use was rampant. Its dance floor was decorated with an image of the " Man in the Moon " that included an animated cocaine spoon . The " Copacabana ", another New York nightclub dating to the 1940s, had a revival in the late 1970s when it embraced disco; it would become the setting of a Barry Manilow song of the same name . In Washington, D.C. , large disco clubs such as "The Pier" ("Pier 9") and "The Other Side", originally regarded exclusively as " gay bars ", became particularly popular among the capital area's gay and straight college students in the late '70s. By 1979 there were 15,000-20,000 disco nightclubs in the US, many of them opening in suburban shopping centers, hotels, and restaurants. The 2001 Club franchises were the most prolific chain of disco clubs in the country. [28] Although many other attempts were made to franchise disco clubs, 2001 was the only one to successfully do so in this time frame. [29] Sound and light equipment[ edit ] Major disco clubs had lighted dance floors, with the lights flashing to complement the beat. The reflective light disco ball was a fixture on the ceilings of many discothèques. Powerful, bass-heavy, hi-fi sound systems were viewed as a key part of the disco club experience. "[Loft-party host David] Mancuso introduced the technologies of tweeter arrays (clusters of small loudspeakers, which emit high-end frequencies, positioned above the floor) and bass reinforcements (additional sets of subwoofers positioned at ground level) at the start of the 1970s to boost the treble and bass at opportune moments, and by the end of the decade sound engineers such as Richard Long had multiplied the effects of these innovations in venues such as the Garage." [30] Typical lighting designs for disco dance floors include multi-colored lights that swirl around or flash to the beat, strobe lights , an illuminated dance floor , and a mirror ball . DJs[ edit ] Disco-era disc jockeys (DJs) would often remix existing songs using reel-to-reel tape machines , and add in percussion breaks, new sections, and new sounds. DJs would select songs and grooves according to what the dancers wanted, transitioning from one song to another with a DJ mixer and using a microphone to introduce songs and speak to the audiences. Other equipment was added to the basic DJ setup, providing unique sound manipulations, such as reverb , equalization, and echo effects unit . Using this equipment, a DJ could do effects such as cutting out all but the bassline of a song and then slowly mixing in the beginning of another song using the DJ mixer's crossfader. Notable U.S. disco DJs include Francis Grasso of The Sanctuary, David Mancuso of The Loft , Frankie Knuckles of the Chicago Warehouse , Larry Levan of the Paradise Garage , Nicky Siano , Walter Gibbons , Karen Mixon Cook , Jim Burgess , John "Jellybean" Benitez , Richie Kulala of Studio 54 , and Rick Salsalini. Some DJs were also record producers who created and produced disco songs in the recording studio . Larry Levan, for example, was a prolific record producer as well as a DJ. Because record sales were often dependent on dance floor play by DJs in the nightclubs, DJs were also influential in the development and popularization of certain types of disco music being produced for record labels. Dance[ edit ] Disco dancers typically wore loose slacks for men and flowing dresses for women, which enabled ease of movement on the dance floor. In the early years, dancers in discos danced in a "hang loose" or "freestyle" approach. At first, many dancers improvised their own dance styles and dance steps. Later in the disco era, popular dance styles were developed, including the "Bump", "Penguin", "Boogaloo", "Watergate", and "Robot". By October 1975 the Hustle reigned. It was highly stylized, sophisticated, and overtly sexual. Variations included the Brooklyn Hustle, New York Hustle , and Latin Hustle . [27] During the disco era, many nightclubs would commonly host disco dance competitions or offer free dance lessons. Some cities had disco dance instructors or dance schools, which taught people how to do popular disco dances such as "touch dancing", "the hustle", and " the cha cha ". The pioneer of disco dance instruction was Karen Lustgarten in San Francisco in 1973. Her book The Complete Guide to Disco Dancing (Warner Books 1978) was the first to name, break down and codify popular disco dances as dance forms and distinguish between disco freestyle, partner, and line dances. The book topped the New York Times bestseller list for 13 weeks and was translated into Chinese, German, and French. In Chicago, the Step By Step disco dance TV show was launched with the sponsorship support of the Coca-Cola company. Produced in the same studio that Don Cornelius used for the nationally syndicated dance/music television show, Soul Train , Step by Step's audience grew and the show became a success. The dynamic dance duo of Robin and Reggie led the show. The pair spent the week teaching disco dancing to dancers in the disco clubs. The instructional show aired on Saturday mornings and had a strong following. Its viewers would stay up all night on Fridays so they could be on the set the next morning, ready to return to the disco on Saturday night knowing with the latest personalized steps. The producers of the show, John Reid and Greg Roselli, routinely made appearances at disco functions with Robin and Reggie to scout out new dancing talent and promote upcoming events such as "Disco Night at White Sox Park". In Sacramento, California, Disco King Paul Dale Roberts danced for the Guinness Book of World Records. He danced for 205 hours, the equivalent of 8½ days. Other dance marathons took place afterward and Roberts held the world record for disco dancing for a short period of time. [31] Some notable professional dance troupes of the 1970s included Pan's People and Hot Gossip . For many dancers, a key source of inspiration for 1970s disco dancing was the film Saturday Night Fever (1977). Further influence came from the music and dance style of such films as Fame (1980), Disco Dancer (1982), Flashdance (1983), and The Last Days of Disco (1998). Interest in disco dancing also helped spawn dance competition TV shows such as Dance Fever (1979). Fashion[ edit ] Dancers at an East German discothèque in 1977. Due to the constant scarcity of consumer goods in the then socialist part of Germany, particularly more exotic fashion items like disco wear, people often sewed them themselves . Disco fashions were very trendy in the late 1970s. Discothèque-goers often wore glamorous, expensive, and extravagant fashions for nights out at their local disco club. Some women would wear sheer, flowing dresses, such as Halston dresses, or loose, flared pants. Other women wore tight, revealing, sexy clothes, such as backless halter tops , disco pants , "hot pants", or body-hugging spandex bodywear or "catsuits". [32] Men would wear shiny polyester Qiana shirts with colorful patterns and pointy, extra wide collars, preferably open at the chest. Men often wore Pierre Cardin suits, three piece suits with a vest, and double-knit polyester shirt jackets with matching trousers known as the leisure suit . Men's leisure suits were typically form-fitted to some parts of the body, such as the waist and bottom while the lower part of the pants were flared in a bell bottom style, to permit freedom of movement. [32] During the disco era, men engaged in elaborate grooming rituals and spent time choosing fashion clothing, activities that would have been considered "feminine" according to the gender stereotypes of the era. [32] Women dancers wore glitter makeup, sequins , or gold lamé clothing that would shimmer under the lights. [32] Bold colors were popular for both genders. Platform shoes and boots for both genders and high heels for women were popular footwear. [32] Necklaces and medallions were a common fashion accessory . Less commonly, some disco dancers wore outlandish costumes, dressed in drag , covered their bodies with gold or silver paint, or wore very skimpy outfits leaving them nearly nude; these uncommon get-ups were more likely to be seen at invitation-only New York City loft parties and disco clubs. [32] Drug subculture[ edit ] In addition to the dance and fashion aspects of the disco club scene, there was also a thriving club drug subculture , particularly for drugs that would enhance the experience of dancing to the loud, bass-heavy music and the flashing colored lights, such as cocaine [33] (nicknamed "blow"), amyl nitrite (" poppers "), [34] and the "... other quintessential 1970s club drug Quaalude , which suspended motor coordination and gave the sensation that one's arms and legs had turned to ' Jell-O .'" [35] Quaaludes were so popular at disco clubs that the drug was nicknamed "disco biscuits". [36] Paul Gootenberg states that "[t]he relationship of cocaine to 1970s disco culture cannot be stressed enough..." [33] During the 1970s, the use of cocaine by well-to-do celebrities led to its "glamorization" and to the widely held view that it was a "soft drug". [37] LSD , marijuana , and "speed" (amphetamines) were also popular in disco clubs, and the use of these drugs "...contributed to the hedonistic quality of the dance floor experience." [38] Since disco dances were typically held in liquor licensed - nightclubs and dance clubs , alcoholic drinks were also consumed by dancers; some users intentionally combined alcohol with the consumption of other drugs, such as Quaaludes, for a stronger effect. Eroticism and sexual liberation[ edit ] According to Peter Braunstein , the "massive quantities of drugs ingested in discothèques produced the next cultural phenomenon of the disco era: rampant promiscuity and public sex . While the dance floor was the central arena of seduction , actual sex usually took place in the nether regions of the disco: bathroom stalls, exit stairwells , and so on. In other cases the disco became a kind of 'main course' in a hedonist's menu for a night out." [35] At The Saint nightclub, a high percentage of the gay male dancers and patrons would have sex in the club; they typically had unprotected sex , because in 1980, HIV-AIDS had not yet been identified. [39] At The Saint, "dancers would elope to an unpoliced upstairs balcony to engage in sex." [39] The promiscuity and public sex at discos was part of a broader trend towards exploring a freer sexual expression in the 1970s, an era that is also associated with " swingers clubs , hot tubs , [and] key parties ." [40] In his paper, "In Defense of Disco" (1979), Richard Dyer claims eroticism as one of the three main characteristics of disco. [41] As opposed to rock music which has a very phallic centered eroticism focusing on the sexual pleasure of men over other persons, Dyer describes disco as featuring a non-phallic full body eroticism. [41] Through a range of percussion instruments, a willingness to play with rhythm, and the endless repeating of phrases without cutting the listener off, disco achieved this full-body eroticism by restoring eroticism to the whole body for both sexes. [41] This allowed for the potential expression of sexualities not defined by the cock/penis, and the erotic pleasure of bodies that are not defined by a relationship to a penis. [41] The sexual liberation expressed through the rhythm of disco is further represented in the club spaces that disco grew within. In Peter Shapiro 's Modulations: A History of Electronic Music : Throbbing Words on Sound, he discusses eroticism through the technology disco utilizes to create its audacious sound. [42] The music, Shapiro states, is adjunct to "the pleasure-is-politics ethos of post- Stonewall culture." He explains how "mechano-eroticism", which links the technology used to create the unique mechanical sound of disco to eroticism, set the genre in a new dimension of reality living outside of naturalism and heterosexuality. Randy Jones and Mark Jacobsen echo this sentiment in BBC Radio's "The Politics of Dancing: How Disco Changed the World," describing the loose, hip-focused dance style as "a new kind of communion" that celebrates the sparks of liberation brought on the Stonewall riots. [43] As New York state had laws against homosexual behavior in public, including dancing with a member of the same sex, the eroticism of disco served as resistance and an expression of sexual freedom. [44] He uses Donna Summer's singles " Love to Love You Baby " (1975) and " I Feel Love " (1977) as examples of the ever-present relationship between the synthesized bass lines and backgrounds to the simulated sounds of orgasms. Summer's voice echoes in the tracks, and likens them to the drug-fervent, sexually liberated fans of disco who sought to free themselves through disco's "aesthetic of machine sex." [45] Shapiro sees this as an influence that creates sub-genres like hi-NRG and dub -disco, which allowed for eroticism and technology to be further explored through intense synth bass lines and alternative rhythmic techniques that tap into the entire body rather than the obvious erotic parts of the body. The New York nightclub The Sanctuary under resident DJ Francis Grasso is a prime example of this sexual liberty. In their history of the disc jockey and club culture, Bill Brewster and Frank Broughton describe the Sanctuary as "poured full of newly liberated gay men, then shaken (and stirred) by a weighty concoction of dance music and pharmacoia of pills and potions, the result is a festivaly of carnality." [46] The Sanctuary was the "first totally uninhibited gay discotheque in America" and while sex was not allowed on the dancefloor, the dark corners, bathrooms. and hallways of the adjacent buildings were all utilized for orgy-like sexual engagements. [46] By describing the music, drugs, and liberated mentality as a trifecta coming together to create the festival of carnality, Brewster and Broughton are inciting all three as stimuli for the dancing, sex, and other embodied movements that contributed to the corporeal vibrations within the Sanctuary. It supports the argument that disco music took a role in facilitating this sexual liberation that was experienced in the discotheques. The recent legalization of abortion and the introduction of antibiotics and the pill facilitated a culture shift around sex from one of procreation to pleasure and enjoyment. Thus was fostered a very sex-positive framework around discotheques. [47] Further, in addition to gay sex being illegal in New York state, until 1973 the American Psychiatric Association classified homosexuality as an illness. [46] This law and classification coupled together can be understood to have heavily dissuaded the expression of queerness in public, as such the liberatory dynamics of discotheques can be seen as having provided space for self-realization for queer persons. David Mancuso's club/house party, The Loft , was described as having a " pansexual attitude [that] was revolutionary in a country where up until recently it had been illegal for two men to dance together unless there was a woman present; where women were legally obliged to wear at least one recognizable item of female clothing in public; and where men visiting gay bars usually carried bail money with them." [48] History[ edit ] 1940s–1960s: First discotheques[ edit ] Disco was mostly developed from music that was popular on the dance floor in clubs that started playing records instead of having a live band. The first discotheques mostly played swing music . Later on, uptempo rhythm and blues became popular in American clubs and northern soul and glam rock records in the UK. In the early 1940s, nightclubs in Paris resorted to playing jazz records during the Nazi occupation. Régine Zylberberg claimed to have started the first discotheque and to have been the first club DJ in 1953 in the "Whisky à Go-Go" in Paris. She installed a dance floor with colored lights and two turntables so she could play records without having a gap in the music. [49] In October 1959, the owner of the Scotch Club in Aachen, West Germany chose to install a record player for the opening night instead of hiring a live band. The patrons were unimpressed until a young reporter, who happened to be covering the opening of the club, impulsively took control of the record player and introduced the records that he chose to play. Klaus Quirini later claimed to thus have been the world's first nightclub DJ. [17] 1960s–1974: Precursors and early disco music[ edit ] During the 1960s, discotheque dancing became a European trend that was enthusiastically picked up by the American press. [17] At this time, when the discotheque culture from Europe became popular in the United States, several music genres with danceable rhythms rose to popularity and evolved into different sub-genres: rhythm and blues (originated in the 1940s), soul (late 1950s and 1960s), funk (mid-1960s) and go-go (mid-1960s and 1970s; more than "disco", the word "go-go" originally indicated a music club). Musical genres that were primarily performed by African-American musicians would influence much of early disco. Also during the 1960s, the Motown record label developed its own approach, described as having "1) simply structured songs with sophisticated melodies and chord changes, 2) a relentless four-beat drum pattern, 3) a gospel use of background voices, vaguely derived from the style of the Impressions , 4) a regular and sophisticated use of both horns and strings, 5) lead singers who were half way between pop and gospel music, 6) a group of accompanying musicians who were among the most dextrous, knowledgeable, and brilliant in all of popular music (Motown bassists have long been the envy of white rock bassists) and 7) a trebly style of mixing that relied heavily on electronic limiting and equalizing (boosting the high range frequencies) to give the overall product a distinctive sound, particularly effective for broadcast over AM radio." [50] Motown had many hits with disco elements by acts like Eddie Kendricks (" Keep on Truckin' " in 1973, [51] " Boogie Down " in 1974). At the end of the 1960s, musicians, and audiences from the Black, Italian, and Latino communities adopted several traits from the hippie and psychedelia subcultures. They included using music venues with a loud, overwhelming sound, free-form dancing, trippy lighting, colorful costumes, and the use of hallucinogenic drugs. [52] [53] [54] In addition, the perceived positivity, lack of irony, and earnestness of the hippies informed proto-disco music like MFSB 's album Love Is the Message . [52] [55] Partly through the success of Jimi Hendrix , psychedelic elements that were popular in rock music of the late 1960s found their way into soul and early funk music and formed the subgenre psychedelic soul . Examples can be found in the music of the Chambers Brothers , George Clinton with his Parliament-Funkadelic collective, Sly and the Family Stone , and the productions of Norman Whitfield with The Temptations . The long instrumental introductions and detailed orchestration found in psychedelic soul tracks by the Temptations are also considered as cinematic soul . In the early 1970s, Curtis Mayfield and Isaac Hayes scored hits with cinematic soul songs that were actually composed for movie soundtracks: " Superfly " (1972) and " Theme from Shaft " (1971). The latter is sometimes regarded as an early disco song. [56] From the mid-1960s to early 1970s, Philadelphia soul and New York soul developed as sub-genres that also had lavish percussion , lush string orchestra arrangements, and expensive record production processes. In the early 1970s, the Philly soul productions by Gamble and Huff evolved from the simpler arrangements of the late-1960s into a style featuring lush strings, thumping basslines, and sliding hi-hat rhythms. These elements would become typical for disco music and are found in several of the hits they produced in the early 1970s: " Love Train " by the O'Jays (with MFSB as the backup band) was released in 1972 and topped the Billboard Hot 100 in March 1973 " Now That We Found Love " by The O'Jays (1973), later a hit for Third World in 1978 " TSOP (The Sound of Philadelphia) " by MFSB with vocals by The Three Degrees , a wordless song written as the theme for Soul Train and a #1 hit on the Billboard Hot 100 in 1974 Other early disco tracks that helped shape disco and became popular on the dance floors of (underground) discotheque clubs and parties include: " Jungle Fever " by The Chakachas was first released in Belgium in 1971 and later released in the U.S. in 1972, where it reached #8 on the Billboard Hot 100 that same year " Soul Makossa " by Manu Dibango was first released in France in 1972; it was picked up by the underground disco scene in New York and subsequently got a proper release in the U.S., reaching #35 on the Hot 100 in 1973 " The Night " by the Four Seasons was released in 1972, but was not immediately popular; it appealed to the Northern soul scene and became a hit in the UK in 1975 [57] " Love's Theme " by the Love Unlimited Orchestra , conducted by Barry White , an instrumental song originally featured on Under the Influence of... Love Unlimited in July 1973 from which it was culled as a single in November of that year; subsequently, the conductor included it on his own debut album "Sound Your Funky Horn" by KC and the Sunshine Band [58] in 1974 "Rock Your Baby" by George McCrae in 1974 "Do It" by B.T. Express in 1974 " Boogie Down " by Eddie Kendricks in 1974. Early disco was dominated by record producers and labels such as Salsoul Records (Ken, Stanley, and Joseph Cayre ), West End Records ( Mel Cheren ), Casablanca ( Neil Bogart ), and Prelude ( Marvin Schlachter ). The genre was also shaped by Tom Moulton , who wanted to extend the enjoyment of dance songs — thus creating the extended mix or " remix ", going from a three-minute 45 rpm single to the much longer 12" record. Other influential DJs and remixers who helped to establish what became known as the "disco sound" included David Mancuso , Nicky Siano , Shep Pettibone , Larry Levan , Walter Gibbons , and Chicago-based Frankie Knuckles . Frankie Knuckles was not only an important disco DJ; he also helped to develop house music in the 1980s. Disco hit the television airwaves as part of the music/dance variety show Soul Train in 1971 hosted by Don Cornelius , then Marty Angelo 's Disco Step-by-Step Television Show in 1975, Steve Marcus's Disco Magic/Disco 77, Eddie Rivera's Soap Factory , and Merv Griffin 's Dance Fever , hosted by Deney Terrio , who is credited with teaching actor John Travolta to dance for his role in the film Saturday Night Fever (1977), as well as DANCE, based out of Columbia, South Carolina . In 1974, New York City's WPIX-FM premiered the first disco radio show. [59] Early disco culture in the United States[ edit ] In the 1970s, the key counterculture of the 1960s , the hippie movement, was fading away. The economic prosperity of the previous decade had declined, and unemployment, inflation, and crime rates had soared. Political issues like the backlash from the Civil Rights Movement culminating in the form of race riots , the Vietnam War , the assassinations of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and John F. Kennedy , and the Watergate scandal, left many feeling disillusioned and hopeless [ citation needed ]. The start of the '70s was marked by a shift in the consciousness of the American people: the rise of the feminist movement , identity politics , gangs, etc. very much shaped this era. Disco music and disco dancing provided an escape from negative social and economic issues. [60] The non-partnered dance style of disco music allowed people of all races and sexual orientations to enjoy the dancefloor atmosphere. [61] In Beautiful Things in Popular Culture, Simon Frith highlights the sociability of disco and its roots in 1960s counterculture. "The driving force of the New York underground dance scene in which disco was forged was not simply that city's complex ethnic and sexual culture but also a 1960s notion of community, pleasure and generosity that can only be described as hippie", he says. "The best disco music contained within it a remarkably powerful sense of collective euphoria." [62] The birth of disco is often claimed to be found in the private dance parties held by New York City DJ David Mancuso's home that became known as The Loft , an invitation-only non-commercial underground club that inspired many others. [20] He organized the first major party in his Manhattan home on Valentine's Day 1970 with the name "Love Saves The Day". After some months the parties became weekly events and Mancuso continued to give regular parties into the 1990s. [63] Mancuso required that the music played had to be soulful, rhythmic, and impart words of hope, redemption, or pride. [48] When Mancuso threw his first informal house parties, the gay community (which made up much of The Loft's attendee roster) was often harassed in the gay bars and dance clubs , with many gay men carrying bail money with them to gay bars. But at The Loft and many other early, private discotheques , they could dance together without fear of police action thanks to Mancuso's underground, yet legal, policies. Vince Aletti described it "like going to party, completely mixed, racially and sexually, where there wasn't any sense of someone being more important than anyone else," and Alex Rosner reiterated this saying "It was probably about sixty percent black and seventy percent gay...There was a mix of sexual orientation, there was a mix of races, mix of economic groups. A real mix, where the common denominator was music." [48] Film critic Roger Ebert called the popular embrace of disco's exuberant dance moves an escape from "the general depression and drabness of the political and musical atmosphere of the late seventies." [64] Pauline Kael , writing about the disco-themed film Saturday Night Fever , said the film and disco itself touched on "something deeply romantic, the need to move, to dance, and the need to be who you'd like to be. Nirvana is the dance; when the music stops, you return to being ordinary." [65] Early disco culture in the United Kingdom[ edit ] In the late 1960s, uptempo soul with heavy beats and some associated dance styles and fashion were picked up in the British mod scene and formed the northern soul movement. Originating at venues such as the Twisted Wheel in Manchester , it quickly spread to other UK dancehalls and nightclubs like the Chateau Impney ( Droitwich ), Catacombs (Wolverhampton), the Highland Rooms at Blackpool Mecca , Golden Torch (Stoke-on-Trent), and Wigan Casino . As the favoured beat became more uptempo and frantic in the early 1970s, northern soul dancing became more athletic, somewhat resembling the later dance styles of disco and break dancing. Featuring spins , flips , karate kicks, and backdrops, club dancing styles were often inspired by the stage performances of touring American soul acts such as Little Anthony & the Imperials and Jackie Wilson . In 1974, there were an estimated 25,000 mobile discos and 40,000 professional disc jockeys in the United Kingdom. Mobile discos were hired deejays that brought their own equipment to provide music for special events. Glam rock tracks were popular, with, for example, Gary Glitter 's 1972 single " Rock and Roll Part 2 " becoming popular on UK dance floors while it did not get much radio airplay. [66] 1974–1977: Rise to mainstream[ edit ] From 1974 to 1977, disco music increased in popularity as many disco songs topped the charts. The Hues Corporation 's " Rock the Boat " (1974), a US number-one single and million-seller, was one of the early disco songs to reach number one. The same year saw the release of " Kung Fu Fighting ", performed by Carl Douglas and produced by Biddu , which reached number one in both the UK and US, and became the best-selling single of the year [67] and one of the best-selling singles of all time with 11 million records sold worldwide, [68] [69] helping to popularize disco to a great extent. [68] Another notable disco success that year was George McCrae 's " Rock Your Baby ": [70] it became the United Kingdom's first number one disco single. [71] [70] In the northwestern sections of the United Kingdom, the northern soul explosion, which started in the late 1960s and peaked in 1974, made the region receptive to disco, which the region's disc jockeys were bringing back from New York City. The shift by some DJs to the newer sounds coming from the U.S. resulted in a split in the scene, whereby some abandoned the 1960s soul and pushed a modern soul sound which tended to be more closely aligned with disco than soul. Gloria Gaynor in 1976 In 1975, Gloria Gaynor released her first side-long vinyl album , which included a remake of the Jackson 5 's " Never Can Say Goodbye " (which, in fact, is also the album title ) and two other songs, "Honey Bee" and her disco version of " Reach Out (I'll Be There) ". The album first topped the Billboard disco/dance charts in November 1974. Later in 1978, Gaynor's number-one disco song was " I Will Survive ", which was seen as a symbol of female strength and a gay anthem, [72] like her further disco hit, a 1983 remake of " I Am What I Am ". In 1979 she released " Let Me Know (I Have a Right) ", a single which gained popularity in the civil rights movements. Also in 1975, Vincent Montana Jr. 's Salsoul Orchestra contributed with their Latin-flavored orchestral dance song "Salsoul Hustle", reaching number four on the Billboard Dance Chart; their 1976 hits were " Tangerine " and "Nice 'n' Naasty", the first being a cover of a 1941 song.[ citation needed ]
Toggle the table of contents Grime music Genre of electronic music originating in the United Kingdom Grime Grindie Grime is a genre of electronic dance music (EDM) [3] that emerged in London in the early 2000s. It developed out of the earlier UK dance style UK garage , [4] and draws influences from jungle , dancehall , and hip hop . [2] The style is typified by rapid, syncopated breakbeats , generally around 140 beats per minute , [4] [1] and often features an aggressive or jagged electronic sound. [5] Emceeing is a significant element of the style, and lyrics often revolve around gritty depictions of urban life. [6] The style initially spread among pirate radio stations and underground scenes before achieving some mainstream recognition in the UK during the mid-2000s through artists such as Dizzee Rascal , Kano , Lethal Bizzle , and Wiley .  In the mid-2010s, grime began to receive popular attention in Canada. [7] The genre has been described as the "most significant musical development within the UK for decades." [8] Though they are often compared, grime is generally considered distinct from hip hop due to its roots primarily being genres such as UK garage and jungle. [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] Many but not all grime artists are from the black British community. Origins[ edit ] Grime emerged in the early 2000s in London . [14] It has origins tied with UK pirate radio stations such as Rinse FM , [15] [16] Deja Vu, Major FM, Delight FM, Freeze 92.7 and Mission. [6] [14] and it was through pirate radio that artists could first present themselves and build an audience. [17] In the late 1990s, UK garage grew in popularity and also found crossover commercial success with shows on Kiss 100 and BBC Radio 1 . Whilst much of the popular UK garage sound fused soul and R&B influences, a 'darker garage' sound was also appearing which was more instrumental and less vocal, which allowed MCs to lay down lyrics over them. The role of MCs became more prominent on radio shows, and collectives such as So Solid Crew (on Delight FM), Heartless Crew (on Mission), and Pay As U Go (on Rinse FM) would begin to pave the way for what would eventually be called "grime". [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] Members of these crews would begin to experiment with accessible music creation software such as Fruityloops to write their own instrumentals which were cut to dubplate for shows. The first grime track is often debated. Some will credit Pay As U Go's "Know We" or So Solid Crew's "Dilemma" (both were released in 2000), however, " Eskimo " by Wiley (produced in Christmas 1999 or early 2000, [23] [24] but released in 2002) and " Pulse X " by Youngstar (released in 2002), a member of Musical Mobb, are also often considered to be contenders. [25] [26] [27] [28] Dizzee Rascal personally claimed his song "Crime", released in 2000, was the first grime song. [29] DJ Slimzee and DJ Karnage have also suggested "Year 2000" (released 2000) by Wiley as a contender. [30] Other tracks that were among the first to be labelled as "grime" include "Ice Rink" and "Igloo" by Wiley, "Creeper" by Danny Weed , and "Dollar Sign" by Sticky featuring Stush. [16] [31] [32] Wiley at the timed dubbed the sound 'eskibeat' rather than "grime", which had yet to gain popular usage. [26] [20] [19] His song "Eskimo" was characterised by its sparse and cold production, and "awkward, off-kilter rhythms". Wiley explained this colder, darker sound, reflected his mental state at the time, stating "The music reflects what's going on in society. Everyone's so angry at the world and each other. And they don't know why" to Spin magazine in 2005. [20] The name "grime" was coined by journalists who initially termed the music's sub-bass heavy sound as "grimy", which subsequently became "grime". It has also been suggested by artists themselves that the term fits as the music frequently talks about "grimy goings-on" in deprived areas. [26] Initially, some referred to the genre as 'grimey garage'. [33] At this point, the style was known by a number of names, including 8-bar (meaning eight-bar verse patterns), nu shape (which encouraged more complex 16-bar and 32-bar verse patterns), sublow (a music style and movement created by Jon E Cash with Dread D (T Williams) and crew "The Black Ops", [34] the name sublow being a reference to the very low bassline frequencies, [35] often around 40 Hz ) and eskibeat, a term applied specifically to a style initially developed by Wiley and his collaborators, incorporating dance and electro elements. This indicated the movement of UK garage away from its house influences towards darker themes and sounds. Wiley's song " Wot Do U Call It " was released in 2004 and was made to address the identity problems grime was experiencing at the time, and to establish its separation from garage. [16] [36] [19] It became Wiley's first grime hit song. [17] Grime is not an offshoot of early electronic music, but rather a subgenre that draws from a wide variety of influences. Early innovative artists such as Dizzee Rascal and Wiley were able to take the strong thumping drums of drum and bass , lyricism and vocal styles of UK garage and alter some of the rhythms of dancehall to capture all three genre's essences and add a new half-time, down-tempo dimension to the mix. The genre's popularity grew exponentially in the United Kingdom, as people across the scene's musical spectrum appreciated grime's eclectic mix of instrumentation and subcultures. This hybridisation united many different music scenes, allowing for it to spread in the same word-of-mouth and mixtape-based style as hip-hop, yet still appeal to fans of electronic music. It also paved the way for more electronic music artists to incorporate stronger Jamaican influence in the future. Grime never received the same attention worldwide that it did in the UK. Much like many other less mainstream forms of British electronic music, its main scene and fan base remain in the United Kingdom. Although grime is recognised as a creative and innovative musical style, [37] there are other contributing factors to its rapid and widespread growth in popularity. The MCs producing current grime music are overwhelmingly young as a group, the most well known names in the industry, Dizzee Rascal and Kano, both getting their first hits at the age of 16 with " I Luv U " and " Boys Love Girls " respectively, and the resultant package of "youth making music for youth" is seen as a crucial factor for grime's success. [38] Grime producers often battle in so-called "war dubs". [39] Clashing between MC's is generally considered to be an important part of grime culture. [26] [14] Roll Deep , a well-known grime crew, performs at the 2006 Love Music Hate Racism festival Dizzee Rascal , Wiley , Kano and Lethal Bizzle were among the first to bring the genre to mainstream media attention in 2003–2004, with their albums Boy in da Corner , Treddin' on Thin Ice , Home Sweet Home and Against All Oddz respectively. Dizzee Rascal garnered widespread critical acclaim and commercial success with Boy in da Corner winning the 2003 Mercury Music Prize . [40] [16] From 2001 to 2006 The RWD magazine forum was cited as a key development in the genre's culture. [41] Moderators included Logan Sama , and artists such as Wiley , Skepta and Jme would often come on the forum to engage with the community. This was the birthplace of Wiley's famous rants, where he would often target forum users and resort to either trolling or humorous insults. [42] [43] [44] The genre was predominantly non-visual in its early stages, meaning you would primarily only hear artists on pirate radio or through their music as opposed to actually seeing what they looked like. This changed with the rise of various DVD series' such as Lord of the Mics , Lord of the Decks, Risky Roadz, Run the Roads and Practise Hours, filmed by amateur videographers such as Roony 'Rsky' Keefe and Troy 'A Plus' Miller. [45] The DVDs often featured artists giving interviews and performing freestyles. [46] [47] [48] [49] These videos often featured record store Rhythm Division on Roman Road in East London, which served as a key community hub for both developing and established Grime MCs during this time. The store was frequented by artists like Wiley, Skepta and Dizzee Rascal before its eventual closure in 2010. [50] Jammer created Lords of the Mics in 2004. The DVD primarily showcased underground artists clashing (or "battle rapping") each other. [51] [16] Lord of the Mics was originally sold by Jammer, Jammer secured an exclusive deal with ukrecordshop.com which helped catapult sales worldwide. The DVD eventually helped smaller grime artists find a platform through selling the DVDs to independent record stores throughout the UK and eventually helping grime form an internet following from uploads to YouTube. [52] This series built a unique platform for artists, because the majority of prior exposure for these artists was through pirate radio. This video series allowed artists to be more visible, and spread their sound. [53] In 2003, TV channel Channel U was formed (later became Channel AKA, now Now 70s ). It would become one of the most important places for people to discover new grime music. [16] [14] [36] In 2004, grime received its first UK Top 20 single with Lethal Bizzle's song " Pow! (Forward) ". The song would prove controversial for the alleged fights it caused in clubs, leading to many venues banning the song from being played. [54] [16] [20] This made it difficult for Lethal Bizzle to find a platform to perform his music. [55] Lethal stated in 2012 to The Guardian that he was unable to play in urban clubs for over a year due to the bans placed on him. Many other grime artists also experienced difficulties performing in clubs due to Form 696 , [56] [22] a police risk assessment form that many clubs were asked to fill in by the Metropolitan police . The form was created in 2005 after a spate of gun violence in clubs. [57] The form was criticised in 2009 by John Whittingdale , a Conservative Party MP, for being "draconian". The form was also criticised for allegedly targeting black music nights due to it asking specifically what ethnic groups may be attending the event. [20] [56] [58] Many grime raves were shut down by police using the form. Lethal Bizzle stated in 2012 this led to a shift from making grime music for the clubs, to making grime music for "in-your-house listening". [56] Form 696 has been blamed for contributing to the decline in popularity grime experienced during the late 2000s. [20] [59] [22] [58] Logan Sama's show on radio station Kiss FM was one of the only daytime radio shows that would regularly play grime during the 2000s. [60] [14] Decline[ edit ] By the late 2000s, grime had begun to enter into a decline. [61] [62] [14] [36] Record labels, radio, and the media struggled with knowing what to do with grime, and as a result limited its impact and exposure. [20] [19] The rise of dubstep and UK funky also made it harder for grime to gain a limelight. [26] Many grime MCs also began to move towards commercial electro house -influenced rap and away from grime music. [63] Artists such as Tinchy Stryder , Chip , and Wiley began to shift away from grime music and instead began releasing music with pop elements to much success. [58] Wiley's track " Wearing My Rolex ", produced by Bless Beats, has been credited for kickstarting this wave of commercialisation, [6] [64] [65] [66] but while it managed to gain a number 2 spot in the official singles chart , [67] many of the initial attempts to replicate this success failed. Tinchy Stryder's " Stryderman " only managed to peak of No. 73, [68] while Roll Deep 's " Do Me Wrong " failed to chart at all. [69] Skepta 's " Rolex Sweep " only peaked at number 86, [69] although it did briefly start a dance craze after it was released, [64] [70] [71] received a remix by the band Coldplay , [72] and featured on the comedy show Misfits . [73] Dizzee Rascal found more success than most, with his songs such as " Dance wiv Me " [74] finding itself on the number one spot on the UK Singles Chart . [75] The wave of commercialised music received some criticism from fellow grime artists for being inauthentic to the original sound. [63] Another commercialisation that happened during this period was grindie , which fused grime with indie rock . [76] [77] Grime did still have some success during this period, such as the popular Tempa T song "Next Hype" released in 2009. [61] [78] "Pow" by Lethal Bizzle was dubbed the 'unofficial song' of the 2010 student protests . [56] The grime scene outside of London was also flourishing in the midlands , particularly in Birmingham . [20] In 2008, GrimeForum was created by Hijj. The forum was a major platform for grime music at the time, providing a space for artists to promote themselves and a space for fans to discuss grime as a whole, something that was important to people outside of London due to the lack of information they had access to. Canadian artist Tre Mission credited the forums importance in his early growth. [62] [60] The lack of media attention towards grime, or any mainstream platforms that would reliably showcase grime, gave rise to internet platforms such as SB.TV (formed in 2006), Link Up TV (formed in 2008), and Grime Daily (formed in 2009, now known as GRM Daily). With their initial focus only on grime music (though this has since changed), these platforms provided an easy outlet for artists to funnel their music through and gain fame from, [79] [80] collectively creating an ecosystem that allows artists to easily record, produce, and release music to the masses without the need of support from traditional media or the music industry . [81] [82] In 2012, Charlie Sloth created "Fire in the Booth" on BBC 1Xtra (later moved to Apple Music ). The show became a popular segment and granted grime MCs and UK hip-hop artists a large platform to showcase themselves. Revival[ edit ] In 2011, a new edition of Lord of the Mics was released, the first since 2006. [83] Lord of the Mics is a series of grime clashes hosted by Jammer . Both the LOTM III DVD and CD charted. [84] Wiley, inspired by the return of LOTM, also brought back Eskimo Dance the following year, a grime rave from the 2000s that had been discontinued. Jammer suggested that the success of Eskimo Dance encouraged more grime raves to be held than had been previously. [85] By 2013, a revival of instrumental grime was occurring in the underground, with a new wave of producers experimenting with grime music. [86] [87] Logos, who was credited by FactMag for initiating the revival, credited the fall of dubstep as inspiration for going back to grime and reimagining it. [88] In 2013, just a year prior to grime's resurgence in the mainstream, a large 'war dub' occurred amongst dozens of grime producers. It started off with grime producer Bless Beats releasing "Wardub" on Twitter, followed by a response from Shizznit which also included disses towards various producers within the scene, who in-turn followed up with their own diss instrumentals. [89] [90] In the following year, grime experienced a commercial MC-led revival, initiated by the success of Meridian Dan's " German Whip " featuring Big H and Jme . [22] [20] [14] [59] The song reached number 13 in the UK Singles Charts. Two months after that, Skepta reached number 21 in the UK Singles Chart with his single " That's Not Me " featuring his brother Jme. [16] [20] Two months later, Lethal Bizzle released the single " Rari WorkOut " featuring Jme and Tempa T , which also charted, peaking at number 11 in the UK Singles Charts. A wave of new successful young grime MC's also began to emerge, such as Stormzy , AJ Tracey , Novelist , Jammz , and Lady Leshurr . [20] [36] [12] [91] In 2015, Kanye West invited various grime artists to join him on stage at the Brit Awards . [16] [14] Following criticism of the performance, [92] Stormzy released " Shut Up ", using the 2004 instrumental "Functions on the Low" produced by XTC, a member of Ruff Sqwad . [20] The song was a massive hit for Stormzy and helped further popularise grime music. [20] Stormzy's performance of the song during the ring walk to Anthony Joshua's Heavyweight boxing match with Dillian Whyte further pushed the song higher up the charts, eventually peaking at number eight on the UK Singles Chart. [93] In February 2016, Ministry of Sound and DJ Maximum released a grime compilation entitled Grime Time, which topped the UK compilations chart.[ citation needed ] In May 2016, Skepta's fourth studio album, Konnichiwa , entered the UK Albums Chart at number two. The album was awarded the 2016 Mercury Prize , [94] and was later credited for introducing grime to a new generation of fans. [95] In January 2017, Wiley released his eleventh studio album Godfather , debuting at number 9 in the charts. [19] In February 2017, Stormzy's Gang Signs & Prayer was the first grime album to reach number one on the UK Albums Chart . In June, the British Phonographic Industry reported that grime sales had risen over 100% with physical sales growing over 109%, digital sales 51% and streaming up 138%. This led to the Official Charts saying grime had "smashed" its way into the mainstream. [96] By 2018, grime's momentum had begun to slow down. Grime's rise has been credited for 'opening the door' for competing genres, such as afroswing and UK drill , that had begun to take the limelight. [97] [98] In 2019, Stormzy became the first grime artist to headline Glastonbury Festival . [99] National growth[ edit ] As grime became more popular in the UK throughout the mid-2000s, it spread out of London to other major British cities. Birmingham , Manchester , Nottingham , Leeds , Sheffield , Blackpool , and Bristol now have grime MCs who are currently gaining major exposure in the scene and have featured on Lord of the Mics, an annual DVD released by Boy Better Know 's Jammer . The national growth of the grime scene has also been evident with many grime artists playing on the urban music stages of the big summer festivals such as Glastonbury , Reading and Leeds , T in the Park and O2 Wireless Festival in Hyde Park . Dizzee Rascal played at all these events in the summer of 2008. [100] [101] In 2015, Manchester grime artist Bugzy Malone was involved in a heavily publicised grime feud with London-based MC Chip who had created controversy with comments during a Fire in the Booth session. The feud catapulted Bugzy Malone to national fame and he has so far released three commercial projects, all debuting in the top 10 in the UK with his latest album charting at number four. [102] The largest scene outside London is based in Birmingham and the wider Birmingham area. [103] So Solid Crew influenced many grime artists, their raw dark track "Dilemma" considered by some to be one of the first grime songs ever. [104] Mike Skinner released an EP entitled All Got Our Runnins , which featured a number of grime MCs on the remixes of some of his tracks. Skinner also produced and featured on Kano 's 2005 hit single "Nite Nite", from the critically acclaimed Home Sweet Home album. In 2006, the second in the series of Lord of the Mics DVDs was released. It featured Devilman from Birmingham, clashing Skepta. Devilman's appearance on Lord of the Mics is one of the earliest examples of a Midlands MC at the forefront of the scene and is credited by Jammer with helping to break down the stigma of accents from outside London over grime music. The clash is considered to be one of the greatest in the LOTM series with artists such as Drake praising it. Devilman would later link up with Mike Skinner to appear on the remix of "Prangin' Out". In 2007, Trilla released the single "G Star", produced by the Dwellaz. A fusion of grime and bassline, it became an underground hit. [105] Several other tracks were released during this time which were also well received by fans, such as Slash's "Birmingham" and C4's "Oorite". In 2009, Wolverhampton producer S-X released the Woooo Riddim, which was widely regarded as one of the most successful instrumentals that year, with many MCs recording their own vocals over the beat.[ citation needed ] By the early 2010s, the grime scene in Birmingham was well established and the city hosted several highly successful events called 'Goonies' at the Rainbow Warehouse in Digbeth . [106] These events attracted some of the biggest names in grime, most notably P-Money, who referenced the events on his single "Slang Like This". [107] Other prominent artists include Deadly, who formed the grime group N.O.D.B, the first group from Birmingham to feature on BBC Radio 1Xtra ; Mayhem , who is also a founding member of N.O.D.B, known for his bombastic sound and his 2012 feud with Wiley , [108] [109] C4, Sox, JayKae and SafOne. Many Birmingham artists have now had success outside the Birmingham region in recent years. The fourth edition of Lady Leshurr 's "Queen's Speech" freestyle has gained over 28 million views on YouTube as of May 2016. [110] In 2016, Lady Leshurr won a MOBO award for the best Female Act. [111] As well as hosting large events, the pirate radio scene includes stations such as Silk City Radio, where Birmingham DJ Big Mikee hosts a regular slot between 10-12pm every Sunday. [112] Birmingham producers such as Preditah and Swifta Beater have become established figures in the grime scene, with leading artists such as Wiley giving recognition to their contribution to grime. [113] In 2011, Preditah released his Solitaire EP; a collection of four grime instrumentals. This EP reached number 1 on the iTunes album charts. Comedy in grime[ edit ] Channel U commissioned the first grime comedy series in 2002: The Booo Krooo , made by RWD magazine 's founding team members Matt Mason and Lex Johnson . Comedy, satire, and playing on stereotypes would become a common theme in grime music, with artists such as Mr Wong, Bearman, and Big Narstie , Junior Spesh, and Tempa T employing humour in their music. [114] [115] In 2006, Afrikan Boy 's "One Day I Went to Lidl" song went viral gaining over a million views on YouTube by 2007. [116] 2014 saw the release of People Just Do Nothing , a mockumentary series that parodied UK garage, pirate radio culture, and the early stages of grime. [117] In 2017, the show won 'Best Scripted Comedy' at the BAFTA Awards . [118] In June 2018, grime MC Big Narstie and comedian Mo Gilligan launched The Big Narstie Show on Channel 4 . [119] In November 2019, IKEA UK used grime MC D Double E as the voice of their Christmas advert 'Silence the Critics'. D Double E wrote a song talking about how dirty the house was and the lyrics were placed over animated household items. [120] International growth[ edit ] The 2005 release of 679 Recordings ' Run the Road compilation showcased some of the most popular grime releases to that point, increasing the popularity and fame of grime and grime artists internationally. A particularly notable grime artist who has had success overseas is Lady Sovereign , who appeared on Late Show with David Letterman , signed to Jay-Z 's Roc-A-Fella Records , and whose " Love Me or Hate Me " became the first video by a British artist to reach number one on MTV 's Total Request Live . [121] It was not until the release of his third album, 2007's Maths + English , that Dizzee Rascal experienced international acclaim. He was nominated for the Mercury Music Prize again, and despite the fact that the album was not released in the United States in 2007, it received high praise from international music critics, magazines, websites and blogs, including Pitchfork Media , [122] Rolling Stone , [123] and Rock Sound . [124] By 2010, he had achieved three number one singles in a row. In Canada, British Man Dem (B.M.D.), a grime collective originally from the UK, popularised grime with their radio show "Brits in the 6ix" in 2008 in which they brought grime artists to the spotlight in Canada. [125] Grime became increasingly popular in Canada during early 2010, most notably by Canadian grime artist Tre Mission , [126] one of the first North American artists to be associated with the predominantly United Kingdom-based grime genre. [127] Drake also proved helpful in bringing grime to the spotlight in Canada; Skepta 's single Shutdown sampled a video by Drake, [128] and Skepta later worked on Drake's More Life project. [129] Various UK MC's have had successful tours in New Zealand, such as Wiley , [130] Stormzy [131] and Eyez. [132] Stormzy's album Gang Signs & Prayer reached No.14 in the New Zealand charts. A grime tour known as Eskimo Dance was intended to occur in Australia and New Zealand in late 2018, featuring MC's Wiley , Lethal Bizzle , Devlin , P Money & Little Dee, President T and producers DJ Target and Rude Kid. It was anticipated to be the 'biggest ever' grime tour in New Zealand. [133] The event was cancelled in late 2018 by Wiley himself for unclear reasons. [134] [135] New Zealand grime MC Stanza Switch Blade and NZ grime crew Spreading The Sickness (STS Crew) have both featured on Risky Roadz, [136] [137] a long-running influential grime video series wherein MC's are made to freestyle over handpicked beats. [138] Australian grime[ edit ] Some DJ's, such as Lady Erica, were playing British grime by the mid-2000s in Australia but it was not common place. [139] UK-born Fraksha is widely regarded as a pioneer of the scene in Australia. [140] [141] [142] [143] Fraksha originally started MC'ing in UK Hip-Hop crew Nine High alongside Scotty Hinds and Byron during the early 2000s. [144] [141] [145] Nine High released two successful UK Hip-Hop mixtapes and performed alongside fellow UK Hip-Hop pioneers including Skinnyman and Klashnekoff . [144] At the time, both Fraksha and Scotty Hinds were involved with the local London rave scenes and were exposed to grime, Jungle and Dubstep . [144] [146] In 2006, both Fraksha and Scotty Hinds would move to Australia and get involved with the local scene there. [141] [146] Fraksha and Scotty Hinds, alongside local MC's Diem and Murky, formed the first Australian based grime collective, Smash Brothers, in 2008. [139] By 2010, the collective was booking grime shows and doing radio sets around Australia. [139] [147] [142] Smash Brothers pioneered what would become Australian grime music, and were known for their high energy performances. [141] In 2010, Fraksha released the first official Australian grime release called It's Just Bars. [145] [142] The mixtape was a success, and was awarded 'Mix-tape of the year' by Ozhiphop Awards. [142] For the most part, few members of Smash Brothers initially released a lot of music other than Fraksha, but all were active in the raving scene where they would go on to expose many to grime music. [141] They also worked with UK based artists such as Skepta , Foreign Beggars and Dexplicit. [142] Another first for Fraksha was the launch of Melbourne radio show The Sunday Roast on KissFM with Affiks, dedicated to grime and Dubstep music. In 2011 he started the first Australian grime night alongside Affiks and Arctic called 50/50. Fraksha in 2011 would go on to perform in New Zealand alongside UK grime pioneer Dizzee Rascal . [144] [142] The resurgence grime was experiencing in the UK during the mid-2010s would also reach Australia. [148] [149] [146] Many British MC's, including Footsie, D Double E , Stormzy , Skepta and Wiley would have successful tours in Australia. [150] [151] [152] In late 2018, a UK MC tour Eskimo Dance was scheduled to occur in Australia featuring MCs Wiley (who created Eskimo Dance), Lethal Bizzle , Devlin , P Money & Little Dee, President T and producers DJ Target and Rude Kid. The event was anticipated to the 'biggest grime event' to ever occur in Australia. It was cancelled just prior to schedule by Wiley himself for unclear reasons. [134] [135] The sound's resurgence also affected the popularity of grime in Australia, with various other Australian MC's picking up the sound with success, such as Diem, Alex Jones, Shadow, Talakai, Nerve, Wombat and Seru. [153] [154] [155] Grime continues to gain traction in Australia with new artists showing face on a regular basis. Promotions such as Melbourne's 50/50 Grime Melbourne [156] and Invasion Crew Perth [157] heavily incorporate the UK's "Rave" style setup for live performances. Sonically speaking, Aussie grime is similar to its UK counterpart aside from the local accents and slang. The Australian hip hop scene also has a significant influence on the sound. [140] Brazilian grime[ edit ] During the early- to mid-2000s, British electronic music was crossing over into Brazil in the form of Dubstep, UK garage, and grime, leading to local DJ's to mix the various sounds into their sets, and set-up events and parties dedicated to the genres. This in-turn led to a small interest in grime music, culminating in early releases such as "Cidadão Comum Refém", released by MV Bill (influenced by a Dizzee Rascal CD) in 2002, [158] and "Vou Keimah!", produced by Bruno Belluomini featuring MC Jimmy Luv. "Vou Keimah!" was premiered in 2005 at a São Paulo called Tranquera and later premiered by British DJ Kode9 on Rinse FM . [159] Brazilian MC Vandal is also an early Brazilian grime pioneer from the 2000s period. [160] [161] [162] [163] Grime in Brazil would fade by the late 2000s, however it would be picked up again during grime's resurgence around 2014 in Rio de Janeiro , São Paulo. Influenced by artists such as Skepta and Dizzee Rascal, a new crop of DJ's and MC's emerged, such as Fleezus, Febem, Diniboy, SD9, Kbrum, Turistas de Guerra, 03 Noxio, and others. Antonio Constantino and Diniboy came up with the idea for a Brasil Grime Show, [164] [165] a radio show modelled after British grime radio sets, such as the Grime Show on London radio station Rinse FM, wherein a DJ will play instrumentals and invite an MC to perform over them for an extended period. [166] [165] [167] [168] The show is recorded at Casa do Meio Studio in Bangu , Rio de Janeiro . Similar to early British grime music, the group has a lack of financial support in making music. New Brazilian MC's, such as Leall, have experienced growth after appearing on the show. Leall's episode in particular has over 80 thousand views. [169] [165] [170] Antonio Constantino and Diniboy grouped up with local DJ's and producers Lucas Sá, Diego Padilha, Yvie Oliveira, and Rennan Guerra in order to create the show, regularly inviting local MC's to perform over grime instrumentals. Brasil Grime Show has also held grime events in Botafogo , Duque de Caxias , and Copacabana . [171] [164] [172] The Brasil Grime Show has been credited with helping the growth of grime music in Brazil. [163] In October 2019, Febem and Fleezus visited the UK and performed on GrimeReportTV and Pyro Radio. [173] [174] This visit was also accompanied by a documentary filmed in London about Brazilian grime, first premiered on October 18 in São Paulo. [175] [176] [177] They also performed a cypher alongside British MC's Eyez, Yizzy , and Jevon for Red Bull . [165] [178] In March 2020, Febem, Fleezus, and producer Cersv released an EP titled BRIME. It featured collaborations with British MC's Jevon and Teeboi. [179] [180] [167] In 2021, it was re-released in vinyl in collaboration with Butterz . [144] Chinese grime[ edit ] A relatively small grime scene exists in Shanghai and Beijing , China, [183] [184] [185] started by two British expats Naaah and Alta. [185] Around 2015, Alta's and Naaah's label Push & Pull and promoter Puzzy Stack began promoting grime parties. [183] In Shanghai, these were primarily hosted in a club called The Shelter. Many local producers would go to the club to showcase their music. [185] The club was shutdown in late 2016 due to licensing problems [186] and they would later move to All Club. [187] A style of grime known as 'sinogrime' which incorporates elements of East Asian motifs first began being noticed in China by 2009, and would influence local producers. [183] Shanghai based producer Swimful remixed Wiley's sinogrime instrumental "Shanghai" in 2016. [188] Beijing based producer Howie Lee also produced an album with Sinogrime elements, called "Mù Chè Shān Chū". [189] Unlike grime elsewhere, Chinese grime is mostly instrumental due to the lack of local MCs. According to Puzzy Stack, a grime promoter based in Beijing, the fast intensity of grime makes it difficult for Chinese MCs to rap over. [183] Clubs play a large role in the scene, holding grime nights wherein local DJs and producers can come and showcase their music. [185] Producers sometimes include samples and references from local pop-culture like Kung-Fu movies or Mandopop . [185] In 2016, UK grime MC Novelist [190] and AJ Tracey [191] visited Shanghai and played alongside local grime producers. Killa P, P Money and Japanese MCs Pakin and Dekishi have also visited. [192] [183] In 2018, Chinese rapper After Journey (艾福杰尼 Àifújiéní) visited the UK to film a documentary [193] about grime alongside UK MC Cadell. As well as the documentary, Cadell and After Journey made the first ever grime song featuring a UK & Chinese MC called "2 Much", [194] which was later featured by DJ Target on BBC Radio 1xtra . [195] [196] Japanese grime[ edit ] In 2004, Japanese DJ's had already begun to play grime music from the UK. [197] In 2008, a group of MC's from Osaka emerged who were inspired by Roll Deep 's Rules And Regulations mixtape, led by pioneers MC Dekishi, MC Duff and MC Tacquilacci. [198] [199] MC Dekishi released the first ever Japanese grime mixtape in 2009, titled "Grime City Volume 1". [197] Osaka MCs are known for rapping extremely fast. [200] Another scene sprung up in the Tokyo region of Shibuya led by Carpainter, Double Clapperz, MC ONJUICY, PAKIN and Sakana Lavenda. [198] PAKIN visited the UK in 2013 where he was invited by Devilman to join the Dark Elements crew. [198] However, Japanese Grime has stayed an underground genre in Japan with little local media attention. [197] In 2013, over a hundred Japanese grime producers participated in a producer clash called War Dub Japan Cup which garnered a massive response in the UK. [201] In 2014, Elijah and Skilliam held a set with Japanese MC's and Producers that went viral via media outlets like SB.TV and GRM Daily receiving significant attention in the UK. [201] In November 2018, record label Butterz celebrated its eighth anniversary at Tokyo based club Unit. Butterz are notable for having an early investment into the Japanese grime scene; this goes back as far as 2009, when Japanese producers would send the label beats via MSN Messenger . [202] Japanese grime has more DJs than it does MCs; as a result, the former takes more importance. [203] Lyrical content differs to UK grime, with a lack of crime related lyrics and more of a focus on societal and political issues, with rebellious counterculture elements. [200] Japanese Grime uses samples and references from local pop-culture like Anime , Japanese Idols and J-pop . [204] Musical style[ edit ] Grime is typified by complex 2-step , 4/4 breakbeats , generally around 140 beats per minute , or sometimes structured around a double-time rhythm, and constructed from different synth, string and electronic sounds. [4] Self-proclaimed 'godfather' of grime Wiley claims in his 2017 autobiography Eskiboy that he personally created most of his early tracks at 140 BPM as it is the default tempo in FL Studio . [1] Stylistically, grime draws on many genres including UK garage, drum and bass , hip hop and dancehall . [37] The lyrics and music combine futuristic electronic elements and dark, guttural basslines.[ citation needed ] Grime predominantly evolved from the UK speed garage scene and genre towards the latter stages, although it takes influences from other genres.[ citation needed ] According to Sasha Frere-Jones of The New Yorker , grime has developed a fierce sound by "distilling" rhythms to a minimal style resulting in a choppy, off-centre sound. Whereas hip hop is inherently dance music, the writer argues that "grime sounds as if it had been made for a boxing gym, one where the fighters have a lot of punching to do but not much room to move." [38] Frere-Jones also states that grime has maintained a style different to hip hop. [38] Hattie Collins supports Frere-Jones' analysis, asserting that grime is "an amalgamation of UK garage with a bit of drum & bass , a splash of punk ". [37] According to Alex de Jong and Marc Schuilenburg, grime music also samples sawtooth wave sounds ( chiptunes ) from video game music and ringtones which had become part of everyday life in London and other parts of the country; [205] Street Fighter II , for example, is frequently sampled and referenced, as grime is "built around lyrical clashes" which are "equated with Street Fighter's 1 on 1 battles". [206] British grime lyrics often reference communication technologies popular with artists and listeners such as smartphones and social media . Sirpixalot recently brought attention to the game Wolverine: Adamantium Rage from 1994 which bears some of the hallmarks sounds of grime. [207] Subgenres and styles[ edit ] Many of the various subgenres and styles of grime, such as 8-bar, nu shape, eskibeat and sublow, were initially names applied to the genre as a whole. In the early 2000s, "grime" had negative connotations for being a "dirty word" [208] and received resistance from within the scene. [209] Over time the various names would encapsulate different niches, whilst "grime" eventually won out to become the overarching name. 8-bar[ edit ] "8-bar" redirects here. For the jazz chord progression, see Eight-bar blues . According to cultural sociologist Monique Charles, grime is typically characterised by four beats to a bar, in 8 or 16 bar cycles. It is one of the reasons why grime was unofficially called 8 bar or 16 bar in its formative years. [210] 8-bar is a subgenre or style of grime, first seen in Youngstar's " Pulse X " instrumental. [211] 8-bar instrumentals switch beats every eight bars, meaning that each 8 bars the MC would be rapping over a different rhythm. This was in contrast to "nu shape", another style of grime which encouraged 16–32 bar patterns. [212] Darkside[ edit ] Darkside was a subgenre pioneered by Terminator . Darkside is defined by its dark, sluggish, and violent content, similar to road rap but over grime instrumentals. [213] Only a few other MCs have tried making the subgenre, such as Shxdow. [214] Eskibeat[ edit ] Eskibeat was initially a name given to music by Wiley before grime was the agreed upon title. [215] The term "eskibeat" is derived from Eskimo , a name for indigenous people who live in the extremely cold northern circumpolar region. This reflected Wiley's mindset at the time, which was both "angry" and "cold-hearted". [215] Eskibeat would later develop into a subgenre of grime, [216] [6] [217] defined by the "futuristic, icy cold synths, devastating basslines and awkward, off-kilter rhythms" [58] pioneered by Wiley in tracks like "Igloo" [218] and " Eskimo ", one of the first examples of grime music and eskibeat. [219] [220] Eskibeat production has had a massive impact on grime music, and has had an influence on UK drill . [221] Rhythm & grime[ edit ] Rhythm & grime, also known as R&G or R'n'G, [225] is a subgenre pioneered in 2004-2005 by producers Terror Danjah, DaVinChe and Scratcha DVA , along with the support of BBC 1Xtra's DJ Cameo . [226] The subgenre mixed grime with R&B , showcasing a softer side of grime, often with accompanying R&B vocals, while keeping the 140bpm rugged sound of grime. [226] Many UK R&B singers, such as Sadie Ama , Lady Ny, Katie Pearl, and Gemma Fox , would perform over R&G instrumentals, usually without an MC rapping alongside them. [226] Many grime artists also made various R&G tracks, such as Ruff Sqwad , Wiley , [227] Kano, [228] Skepta [229] and Dizzee Rascal. [230] Producers such as Blackjack, [231] Iron Soul, [232] Low Deep [233] and Kid D [234] also incorporated R&G elements into their instrumentals. Lady Ny has stated she was the first woman to sing on grime, and the first woman to bring out a grime mixtape. [235] There was some push back against R&G from people who felt it was too Americanised, such as DJ Logan Sama who referred to R&G as having "gimmicks". [236] According to Terror Danjah, after making the track "So Sure" with Kano and Sadie Ama, grime MC Crazy Titch initially told him to stop making "girl tunes", although he would later request Terror produce one for himself. [226] In 2006, Scratcha DVA released the album The Voice of Grime featuring 22 different singers. [237] It was unique at the time due to being the first project to have so many different women singing over grime instrumentals; [237] however, the sound would mostly disappear after the album was released. [226] Many of the R&B singers that were singing over R&G were inconsistent and would regularly disappear. [237] The subgenre made a comeback in the 2010s after American singer Kelela released a mixtape in 2013, Cut 4 Me , featuring a heavy R&G influence. [227] [238] In 2014, she collaborated with British artist Bok Bok to make Melba's Call, another modern take on R&G. [239] Terror Danjah formed R&G Records, a record label dedicated to R&G. In 2017, Terror Danjah and Olivia Louise released "I'll Follow U" on the label. [240] In 2018, Gemma Fox released Grime Vocals Archive, a collection of previously unreleased or unheard rhythm & grime songs. [241] [242] Sinogrime[ edit ] Sinogrime is a term coined by Kode9 in 2005 to describe a style of grime that incorporated East Asian motifs, such as traditional East Asian instruments and samples from vintage Kung Fu films. [189] The style was present before this, however. Earlier examples include Jammer's instrumental "Chinaman" which was released in 2003 and included a sample from the 1993 martial arts film Twin Warriors . [183] The sound was initially pioneered by many people, such as DJ Target, Wiley , Terror Danjah, Ruff Sqwad , Jammer , Geenus, DJ Wonder and Wookie. [243] [244] In a 2003 interview, Wiley stated he "used to watch a lot of Kung Fu films" and used to go to a store called Sterns to find world music to sample. [245] Dizzee Rascal stated his song "Brand New Day", released in 2003, was also inspired by Kung Fu films. [246] The term does not necessarily apply to grime made in Japan or China, unless the instrumental includes East Asian motifs. Sinogrime first began being noticed in China in 2009 and would influence local producers, particularly in Shanghai and Beijing . [183] Shanghai-based producer Swimful remixed Wiley's sinogrime instrumental "Shanghai" in 2016. [188] Beijing-based producer Howie Lee also produced an album with Sinogrime elements, called Mù Chè Shān Chū. [189] Howie Lee described sinogrime as " propaganda ", a sound that represents an image in people's heads, but one that is not necessarily accurate. [247] Sinogrime was described by music critic Dan Hancox as a genre that "barely existed". [243] Dan Hancox suggested that sinogrime reflected a shift away from looking towards America for influence, and instead looking East. [189] This was possibly the result of the rising popularity of Japanese video games and Chinese movies which featured music from their respective countries. [183] Both Wiley and Dizzee Rascal have stated they were inspired by Kung-Fu movies. [245] [246] Sinogrime would see a resurgence in the 2010s via producers like Fatima Al Qadiri , Slackk, Walton and JT The Goon. [248] [249] [250] In 2014, Kuwaiti producer Fatima Al Qadiri released Asiatisch , which had a heavy sinogrime influence and was highly acclaimed, [251] although Fatima was actually unaware of the term "sinogrime" whilst she was making the album. [252] In 2015, Kid D released the Shaolin Struggle EP. [253] Sublow[ edit ] Sublow was an early subgenre of grime, and one of the early names that was used to refer to the entire genre. [254] The subgenre is defined by its heavy synths, edgy rhythms and deep low bass. [255] [256] [35] The sound was initially pushed by Jon E Cash, Dread D (T Williams) and other members of the Black Ops collective. Weightless[ edit ] Weightless is a sound that appeared during the mid 2010s, pioneered by Logos and Mumdance. [257] Weightless is defined by its atmospheric, minimal and ambient sound, giving it a "weightless" feel. [258] [259] Logos compared it to "Devil Mixes", which is a grime instrumental where the drums have been stripped, primarily popularised by Wiley , [260] which he had wanted to expand upon. [261] However weightless goes much further than that, stripping away the typical aggressiveness of a grime track. Mumdance was encouraged to make the sound after being annoyed with the drum infested tracks that DJ's were playing at clubs, without any contrast in-between. [261] Weightless is also influenced by the noise genre. [261] Mumdance and Logos' label, Different Circles, have released two "Weightless" mixtapes showcasing the sound, [262] featuring producers like Rabit, Inkke, Dark0, Murlo, Logos and Strict Face. Mr. Mitch was another notable producer of the subgenre. [263] Criticism[ edit ] As with many similar scenes around the world, grime has encountered some criticism, especially from government officials such as Kim Howells , who made comments that some grime supporters claimed to find "deeply racist", referring to popular artists and crews as "boasting macho idiot rappers". [264] A counter argument is given by Jeff Chang in an article in The Village Voice , where he said Dizzee Rascal's often violent and sexual lyrics are heralded as "capturing, encapsulating, and preserving" the life that he and his peers live on the streets every day. [265]
List of musicians Dubstep is a genre of electronic dance music that originated in South London in the early 2000s. The style emerged as a UK garage offshoot [1] that blended 2-step rhythms and sparse dub production, as well as incorporating elements of broken beat , grime , and drum and bass . [2] In the United Kingdom, the origins of the genre can be traced back to the growth of the Jamaican sound system party scene in the early 1980s. [2] [3] Dubstep is generally characterised by the use of syncopated rhythmic patterns , with prominent basslines , and a dark tone. In 2001, this underground sound and other strains of garage music began to be showcased and promoted at London's night club Plastic People, at the "Forward" night (sometimes stylised as FWD>>), and on the pirate radio station Rinse FM , which went on to be considerably influential to the development of dubstep. The term "dubstep" in reference to a genre of music began to be used by around 2002 by labels such as Big Apple , Ammunition , and Tempa , by which time stylistic trends used in these remixes became more noticeable and distinct from 2-step and grime . [4] A very early supporter of the sound was BBC Radio 1 DJ John Peel , who started playing it from 2003 onwards. In 2004, the last year of his show, his listeners voted Distance , Digital Mystikz , and Plastician in their top 50 for the year. [5] Dubstep started to enter mainstream British popular culture when it spread beyond small local scenes in late 2005 and early 2006; many websites devoted to the genre appeared on the Internet and aided the growth of the scene, such as dubstepforum, the download site Barefiles and blogs such as gutterbreakz. [6] Simultaneously, the genre was receiving extensive coverage in music magazines such as The Wire and online publications such as Pitchfork , with a regular feature entitled The Month In: Grime/Dubstep. Interest in dubstep grew significantly after BBC Radio 1 DJ Mary Anne Hobbs started championing the genre, beginning with a show devoted to it (entitled "Dubstep Warz") in January 2006. [7] [8] [9] Towards the end of the 2000s and into the early 2010s, the genre started to become more commercially successful in the UK, with more singles and remixes entering the music charts. Music journalists and critics also noticed a dubstep influence in several pop artists' work. Around this time, producers also began to fuse elements of the original dubstep sound with other influences, creating fusion genres including future garage and the slower and more experimental post-dubstep . The harsher electro-house and heavy metal -influenced variant brostep , led by American producers such as Skrillex , greatly contributed to dubstep's popularity in the United States. [10] Characteristics Dubstep rhythm example Excerpt demonstrating the rhythmic tension generated between the drum rhythm and bassline. This song features a very sparse rhythm almost entirely composed of kick drum , snare drum , and a sparse hi-hat , with a distinctly half time implied 71bpm tempo. The track is instead propelled by a sub-bass following a four-to-the-floor 142bpm pattern. Problems playing this file? See media help . The music website AllMusic has described dubstep's overall sound as "tightly coiled productions with overwhelming bass lines and reverberant drum patterns, clipped samples, and occasional vocals." [11] According to Simon Reynolds , dubstep's constituents originally came from "different points in the 1989—99 UK lineage: bleep 'n' bass, jungle, techstep , Photek -style neurofunk , speed garage , [and] 2 step." [2] Reynolds comments that the traces of pre-existing styles "worked through their intrinsic sonic effects but also as signifiers, tokenings-back addressed to those who know". [2] Dubstep's early roots are in the more experimental releases of UK garage producers, seeking to incorporate elements of drum and bass into the 2-step garage sound. These experiments often ended up on the B-side of a white label or commercial garage release. [7] [12] [13] Dubstep is generally instrumental . Similar to a vocal garage hybrid – grime – the genre's feel is commonly dark; tracks frequently use a minor key or the Phrygian mode , and can feature dissonant harmonies such as the tritone interval within a riff. [14] Compared to other styles of garage music, dubstep tends to be more minimalistic, focusing on prominent sub-bass frequencies. [15] Some dubstep artists have also incorporated a variety of outside influences, from dub-influenced techno such as Basic Channel to classical music or heavy metal . [15] [16] [17] Rhythm Dubstep rhythms are usually syncopated , and often shuffled or incorporating tuplets . The tempo is nearly always in the range of 132–142 beats per minute , with a clap or snare usually inserted every third beat in a bar. [15] In its early stages, dubstep was often more percussive, with more influences from two‑step drum patterns. Many producers were also experimenting with tribal drum samples, such as Loefah's early release "Truly Dread" and Mala's "Anti-War Dub". In an Invisible Jukebox interview with The Wire, Kode9 commented on a MRK1 track, observing that listeners "have internalized the double-time rhythm" and the "track is so empty it makes [the listener] nervous, and you almost fill in the double time yourself, physically, to compensate". [18] Wobble bass One characteristic of certain strands of dubstep is the wobble bass , often referred to as the "wub", where an extended bass note is manipulated rhythmically. This style of bass is typically produced by using a low-frequency oscillator to manipulate certain parameters of a synthesiser such as volume , distortion or filter cutoff . The resulting sound is a timbre that is punctuated by rhythmic variations in volume, filter cutoff, or distortion. This style of bass is a driving factor in some variations of dubstep, particularly at the more club-friendly end of the spectrum. [19] Wobble bass has been nicknamed, Wobble-step. [20] Structure, bass drops, rewinds, and MCs Originally, dubstep releases had some structural similarities to other genres like drum and bass and UK garage. Typically, this would comprise an intro , a main section (often incorporating a bass drop ), a midsection , a second main section similar to the first (often with another drop), and an outro . Many early dubstep tracks incorporate one or more "bass drops", a characteristic inherited from drum and bass. Typically, the percussion will pause, often reducing the track to silence, and then resume with more intensity, accompanied by a dominant sub-bass (often passing portamento through an entire octave or more, as in the audio example). It is very common for the bass to drop at or very close to 55 seconds into the song, because 55 seconds is just over 32 measures at the common tempo of 140 bpm. However, this (or the existence of a bass drop in general) is by no means a completely rigid characteristic, rather a trope; a large portion of seminal tunes from producers like Kode9 and Horsepower Productions have more experimental song structures which do not rely on a drop for a dynamic peak – and in some instances do not feature a bass drop at all. Rewinds (or reloads) [21] are another technique used by dubstep DJs. If a song seems to be especially popular, the DJ will "spin back" the record by hand without lifting the stylus, and play the track in question again. Rewinds are also an important live element in many of dubstep's precursors; the technique originates in dub reggae soundsystems , is widely employed by pirate radio stations and is also used at UK garage and jungle nights. [22] Taking direct cues from Jamaica 's lyrically sparse deejay and toasting mic styles in the vein of reggae pioneers like U-Roy , the MC's role in dubstep's live experience is critically important to its impact. [23] Notable mainstays in the live experience of the sound are MC Sgt Pokes and MC Crazy D from London, and Juakali from Trinidad. [24] [25] [26] [27] Production in a studio environment seems to lend itself to more experimentation. Kode9 has collaborated extensively with the Spaceape , who MCs in a dread poet style. Kevin Martin 's experiments with the genre are almost exclusively collaborations with MCs such as Warrior Queen, Flowdan , and Tippa Irie . Skream has also featured Warrior Queen and grime artist JME on his debut album, Skream! . Plastician , who was one of the first DJ's to mix the sound of grime and dubstep together, [16] has worked with notable grime setup Boy Better Know as well as renowned Grime MC's such as Wiley, Dizzee Rascal and Lethal Bizzle. He has also released tracks with a dubstep foundation and grime verses over the beats. [28] Dubstep artist and label co-owner Sam Shackleton has moved toward productions which fall outside the usual dubstep tempo, and sometimes entirely lack most of the common tropes of the genre. [29] History The Big Apple Records shop, in Croydon , South London The early sounds of proto-dubstep originally came out of productions during 1999–2000 by producers such as Oris Jay, [17] El-B , [12] Steve Gurley [12] and Zed Bias . [30] [31] Ammunition Promotions, who run the influential club night Forward>> and have managed many proto-dubstep record labels (including Tempa, Soulja, Road, Vehicle, Shelflife, Texture, Lifestyle and Bingo), [8] [17] began to use the term "dubstep" to describe this style of music in around 2002. The term's use in a 2002 XLR8R cover story (featuring Horsepower Productions on the cover) contributed to it becoming established as the name of the genre. [30] [32] Forward>> was originally held at the Velvet Rooms in London's Soho and later moved to Plastic People in Shoreditch , east London. [15] Founded in 2001, Forward>> was critical to the development of dubstep, providing the first venue devoted to the sound and an environment in which dubstep producers could premier new music. [33] Around this time, Forward>> was also incubating several other strains of dark garage hybrids, so much so that in the early days of the club the coming together of these strains was referred to as the "Forward>> sound". [34] An online flyer from around this time encapsulated the Forward>> sound as "b-lines to make your chest cavity shudder." [35] Forward>> also ran a radio show on east London pirate station Rinse FM , hosted by Kode9 . [36] The original Forward>> line ups included Hatcha , Youngsta, Kode 9, Zed Bias, Oris Jay, [17] Slaughter Mob, Jay Da Flex, DJ Slimzee , and others, plus regular guests. The line up of residents has changed over the years to include Youngsta, Hatcha, Geeneus, and Plastician , with Crazy D as MC/host. Producers including D1, Skream and Benga make regular appearances. [33] Mala of Digital Mystikz , one of the pioneers of dubstep music Another crucial element in the early development of dubstep was the Big Apple Records record shop in Croydon . [8] Key artists such as Hatcha and later Skream worked in the shop (which initially sold early UK Hardcore / Rave, Techno and House and later, garage and drum and bass, but evolved with the emerging dubstep scene in the area), [12] while Digital Mystikz were frequent visitors. El-B, Zed Bias, Horsepower Productions , Plastician, N Type, Walsh and a young Loefah regularly visited the shop as well. [8] The shop and its record label have since closed. [30] 2002–2005: Evolution Dubstep producer Skream , one of the most widely known names on the scene since the beginning of the Dubstep movement All throughout 2003, DJ Hatcha pioneered a new direction for dubstep on Rinse FM and through his sets at Forward>>. [8] [31] Playing sets cut to 10" one-off reggae-style dubplates , he drew exclusively from a pool of new South London producers—first Benga and Skream, [31] then also Digital Mystikz and Loefah—to begin a dark, clipped and minimal new direction in dubstep. [37] At the end of 2003, running independently from the pioneering FWD night, an event called Filthy Dub, co promoted by Plastician , and partner David Carlisle started happening regularly. It was there that Skream, Benga, N Type, Walsh, Chef, Loefah, and Cyrus made their debuts as DJs. South London collective Digital Mystikz (Mala and Coki), along with labelmates and collaborators Loefah and MC Sgt Pokes soon came into their own, bringing sound system thinking, dub values, and appreciation of jungle bass weight to the dubstep scene. [30] Digital Mystikz brought an expanded palette of sounds and influences to the genre, most prominently reggae and dub, as well as orchestral melodies. [38] After releasing 12-inch singles on Big Apple, they founded DMZ Records, which has released fourteen 12"s to date. They also began their night DMZ, held every two months in Brixton , [39] a part of London already strongly associated with reggae. [40] DMZ has showcased new dubstep artists such as Skream, Kode 9, Benga, Pinch , DJ Youngsta, Hijak, Joe Nice , and Vex'd. DMZ's first anniversary event (at the Mass venue, a converted church) saw fans attending from places as far away as Sweden , the United States, and Australia, leading to a queue of 600 people at the event. [41] This forced the club to move from its regular 400-capacity space [9] to Mass' main room, an event cited as a pivotal moment in dubstep's history. [17] [42] Later Mala would also found the influential label Deep Medi Musik . [43] In 2004, Richard James ' label, Rephlex , released two compilations that included dubstep tracks – the (perhaps misnamed) Grime and Grime 2. The first featured Plasticman, Mark One and Slaughter Mob, [44] with Kode9, Loefah, and Digital Mystikz appearing on the second. [45] These compilations helped to raise awareness of dubstep at a time when the grime sound was drawing more attention, [30] and Digital Mystikz and Loefah's presence on the second release contributed to the success of their DMZ club night. [46] Soon afterwards, the Independent on Sunday commented on "a whole new sound", at a time when both genres were becoming popular, stating that "grime" and "dubstep" were two names for the same style, which was also known as "sublow", "8-bar", and "eskibeat". [47] 2005–2008: Growth Dubstep Section at Black Market Records, Soho , London In the summer of 2005, Forward>> brought grime DJs to the fore of the line up. [48] Building on the success of Skream's grimey anthem "Midnight Request Line", the hype around the DMZ night and support from online forums (notably dubstepforum.com) [15] and media, [9] the scene gained prominence after Radio 1 DJ Mary Anne Hobbs gathered top figures from the scene for one show, entitled "Dubstep Warz", (later releasing the compilation album Warrior Dubz ). [41] The show created a new global audience for the scene, after years of exclusively UK underground buzz. [15] Burial 's self-titled album appearing in many critics' "Best of ..." lists for the year, notably The Wire's Best Album of 2006. [49] The sound was also featured prominently in the soundtrack for the 2006 sci-fi film Children of Men , [50] which included Digital Mystikz, Random Trio, Kode 9, Pressure and DJ Pinch. [51] Ammunition also released the first retrospective compilation of the 2000–2004 era of dubstep called The Roots of Dubstep, co-compiled by Ammunition and Blackdown on the Tempa Label. [52] The sound's first North American ambassador, Baltimore DJ Joe Nice helped kickstart its spread into the continent. [15] Regular Dubstep club nights started appearing in cities like New York, [53] San Francisco, [32] Seattle, Montreal, Houston, and Denver, [54] while Mary Anne Hobbs curated a Dubstep showcase at 2007's Sónar festival in Barcelona. [17] Non-British artists have also won praise within the larger Dubstep community. [17] The dynamic dubstep scene in Japan is growing quickly despite its cultural and geographical distance from the West. Such DJ/producers as Goth-Trad , Hyaku-mado, Ena and Doppelganger are major figures in the Tokyo scene. [55] Joe Nice has played at DMZ, [56] while the fifth instalment of Tempa's "Dubstep Allstars" mix series (released in 2007) included tracks by Finnish producer Tes La Rok and Americans JuJu and Matty G. [57] BBC Radio 1 DJ Mary Anne Hobbs Techno artists and DJs began assimilating dubstep into their sets and productions. [17] Shackleton's "Blood on My Hands" was remixed by minimal techno producer Ricardo Villalobos (an act reciprocated when Villalobos included a Shackleton mix on his "Vasco" EP) [58] and included on a mix CD by Panoramabar resident Cassy. [17] Ellen Allien and Apparat 's 2006 song "Metric" (from the Orchestra of Bubbles album), [59] [60] Modeselektor 's "Godspeed" (from the 2007's Happy Birthday! album, among other tracks on that same album) and Roman Flugel's remix of Riton 's "Hammer of Thor" are other examples of dubstep-influenced techno. [17] Berlin's Hard Wax record store (operated by influential [61] dub techno artists Basic Channel) [62] [63] has also championed Shackleton's Skull Disco label, later broadening its focus to include other dubstep releases. [16] The summer of 2007 saw dubstep's musical palette expand further, with Benga and Coki scoring a crossover hit (in a similar manner to Skream's "Midnight Request Line") with the track "Night", which gained widespread play from DJs in a diverse range of genres. BBC Radio 1 DJ Gilles Peterson named it his record of 2007, and it was also a massive hit in the equally bassline-orientated, but decidedly more four-to-the-floor genre of bassline house , [64] whilst Burial's late 2007 release Untrue (which was nominated for the 2008 Nationwide Mercury Music Prize in the UK) incorporated extensive use of heavily manipulated, mostly female, 'girl next door' vocal samples. [65] Burial has spoken at length regarding his intent to reincorporate elements of musical precursors such as 2-step garage and house into his sound. [66] Much like drum and bass before it, dubstep started to become incorporated into other media. In 2007, Benga, Skream, and other dubstep producers provided the soundtrack to much of the second series of Dubplate Drama , which aired on Channel 4 with a soundtrack CD later released on Rinse Recordings . A track by Skream also featured in the second series of the teen drama Skins , which also aired on Channel 4 in early 2008. [67] In the summer of 2008, Mary Anne Hobbs invited Cyrus, Starkey, Oneman , DJ Chef , Silkie , Quest, Joker , Nomad, Kulture and MC Sgt Pokes to the BBC 's Maida Vale studios for a show called Generation Bass. The show was the evolution from her seminal BBC Radio 1 Dubstepwarz Show in 2006, and further documented another set of dubstep's producers. [68] [69] [70] [71] Silkie and Quest, along with Kromestar and Heny G would all come through the Anti-Social Entertainment crew, with a show on Rinse FM and later Flex FM . [72] As the genre has spread to become an international rather than UK-centric scene, it has also seen a number of women making headway into the scene in a variety of ways. Alongside Soulja of Ammunition Promotions and Mary Anne Hobbs, an influx of female producers, writers, photographers and DJs all have broken through in the up-til-then male orientated scene. With key 12" releases on Hyperdub , Immigrant and Hotflush Recordings, producers Vaccine , Subeena and Ikonika have introduced a palette of new sounds and influences to the genre, such as double-time bass drums, 8-bit video game samples , hand percussion and lushly arranged strings. [73] Mary Anne Hobbs commented that, unlike "Grime and drum 'n' bass raves, the mood at dubstep nights is less aggressive, or more meditative, leading to a larger female attendance at events than with the genre's precursors. You see the female-to-male ratio constantly going up – it's got the potential to be 40:60". [73] 2009–2014: Mainstream popularity Borgore performing for crowds on 7 July 2011 at the 10th Anniversary Camp Bisco Music Festival in Mariaville Lake, New York The influence of dubstep on more commercial or popular genres can be identified as far back as 2007, with artists such as Britney Spears using dubstep sounds; critics observed a dubstep influence in the song "Freakshow", from the 2007 album Blackout , which Tom Ewing described as "built around the 'wobbler' effect that's a genre standby." [74] [75] Benga and Coki's single "Night" still continued to be a popular track on the UK dance chart more than a year after its release in late 2007, still ranking in the top five at the start of April 2008 on Pete Tong 's BBC Radio 1 dance chart list. [76] However, the year 2009 saw the dubstep sound gaining further worldwide recognition, often through the assimilation of elements of the sound into other genres, in a manner similar to drum and bass before it. At the start of the year, UK electronic duo La Roux put their single " In for the Kill " in the remix hands of Skream . [77] [78] They then gave remix duties of " I'm Not Your Toy " to Nero and then again with their single " Bulletproof " being remixed by Zinc . The same year, London producer Silkie released an influential album, City Limits Vol. 1, on the Deep Medi Musik label, using 1970s funk and soul reference points, a departure from the familiar strains of dub and UK garage. [79] The sound also continued to interest the mainstream press with key articles in magazines like Interview , New York , and The Wire , which featured producer Kode9 on its May 2009 cover. XLR8R put Joker on the cover of its December 2009 issue. [80] [81] [82] In April 2009, UKF Dubstep , a YouTube channel brand was founded by Luke Hood which introduced Dubstep to many young generations internationally at the time. UKF Dubstep has exploded in popularity as the music genre has hit the mainstream. In November 2010 the channel had 100,000 subscribers, and as of November 2019 has over one million. [83] "UKF features established and up and coming producers from around the world, featuring artists from Flux Pavilion / Knife Party to Friction / Hybrid Minds. We're sent a huge amount of music so it's our job to pick the best to upload on the channel for our audience to listen to. In just over 3 years our channels now have more than 2m subscribers and 4 channels – UKF Dubstep, Drum & Bass, Music and Mixes. The audience is getting more and more International and younger." Luke said on the interview with SoSoActive. [84] In a move foreshadowed by endorsements of the sound from R&B, hip-hop and recently, mainstream figures such as Rihanna , or The Bomb Squad 's Hank Shocklee, [85] Snoop Dogg collaborated with dubstep producers Chase & Status , providing a vocal for their "underground anthem", "Eastern Jam". [86] The 2011 Britney Spears track " Hold It Against Me " was also responsible for promoting dubstep tropes within pop music. [87] Rihanna's Rated R album released such content the very year dubstep saw a spike, containing three dubstep tracks. [88] Such events propelled the genre into the biggest radio markets overnight, with considerable airplay. [89] Other hip-hop artists like Xzibit added their vocals to dubstep instrumental tracks for the mixtape project Mr Grustle & Tha Russian Dubstep LA Embrace The Renaissance Vol. 1 Mixed by Plastician . [89] [90] In summer 2009, rapper and actress Eve used Benga's "E Trips"; adding her own verses over the beat to create a new tune called "Me N My"; the first single from her unreleased album Flirt. The track was co-produced by Benga and hip hop producer Salaam Remi . [91] [92] Throughout 2010, the presence of dubstep in the pop charts was notable, with " I Need Air " by Magnetic Man reaching number 10 in the UK singles chart. This presented a turning point in the popularity of mainstream dubstep amongst UK listeners as it was placed on rotation on BBC Radio 1 . [93] " Katy on a Mission " by Katy B (produced by Benga) followed, debuting at number 5 in the UK singles chart, and stayed in the top 10 for five more weeks. [94] Also, in 2010, American producer Skrillex had achieved moderate commercial success in North America with a dubstep-influenced sound. By 2011, his EP Scary Monsters and Nice Sprites had peaked at number three on the U.S. Billboard Dance/Electronic Albums chart. [95] In February 2011, Chase & Status 's second album No More Idols reached No. 2 in the UK album chart. [96] On 1 May 2011, Nero 's third single " Guilt " from their album reached number 8 in the Official UK Singles Chart. [97] DJ Fresh and Nero both had number one singles in 2011 with " Louder " and " Promises ". [98] Strong baselines imported from dubstep continued in popular music with the Taylor Swift song " I Knew You Were Trouble ", which made number 1 on Billboard's U.S. Mainstream Top 40 chart. [99] [100] 2011: Post-dubstep
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of electronic dance music For the album, see House Music (album) . Not to be confused with House band . House music Early 1980s, Chicago , Illinois , United States [9] Typical instruments List of house artists House is a genre of electronic dance music characterized by a repetitive four-on-the-floor beat and a typical tempo of 120-130 beats per minute as a re-emergence of 1970s disco . [10] It was created by DJs and music producers from Chicago 's underground club culture and evolved slowly in the early/mid 1980s as DJs began altering disco songs to give them a more mechanical beat. [1] By early 1988, House became mainstream and supplanted the typical 80s music beat. [11] A full house music track. Problems playing this file? See media help . The TR-909 drum machine (top) and TB-303 synthesizer, instruments often used in house music A house rhythm played on a Roland TR-909 drum machine, featuring a four-on-the-floor bass drum plus cymbal, claps, hi-hats and rimshots In its most typical form, the genre is characterized by repetitive 4/4 rhythms including bass drums , off-beat hi-hats , snare drums , claps , and/or snaps at a tempo of between 120 and 130 beats per minute (bpm) ; synthesizer riffs ; deep basslines ; and often, but not necessarily, sung, spoken or sampled vocals. In house, the bass drum is usually sounded on beats one, two, three, and four, and the snare drum, claps, or other higher-pitched percussion on beats two and four. The drum beats in house music are almost always provided by an electronic drum machine , often a Roland TR-808 , TR-909 , [13] or a TR-707 . Claps, shakers, snare drum, or hi-hat sounds are used to add syncopation . [14] One of the signature rhythm riffs, especially in early Chicago house, is built on the clave pattern. [15] Congas and bongos may be added for an African sound, or metallic percussion for a Latin feel. [14] Sometimes, the drum sounds are "saturated" by boosting the gain to create a more aggressive edge. [14] One classic subgenre, acid house , is defined through the squelchy sounds created by the Roland TB-303 bass synthesizer. House music could be produced on "cheap and consumer-friendly electronic equipment" and used sound gear, which made it easier for independent labels and DJs to create tracks. [16] The electronic drum machines and other gear used by house DJs and producers were formerly considered "too cheap-sounding" by "proper" musicians. [17] House music producers typically use sampled instruments, rather than bringing session musicians into a recording studio. [18] Even though a key element of house production is layering sounds, such as drum machine beats, samples, synth basslines, and so on, the overall "texture...is relatively sparse". [19] Unlike pop songs, which emphasize higher-pitched sounds like melody , in house music, the lower-pitched bass register is most important. [19] House tracks typically involve an intro , a chorus , various verse sections, a midsection, and a brief outro . Some tracks do not have a verse, taking a vocal part from the chorus and repeating the same cycle. House music tracks are often based on eight-bar sections which are repeated. [19] They are often built around bass-heavy loops or basslines produced by a synthesizer and/or around samples of disco , soul , [20] jazz-funk , [8] or funk [20] songs. DJs and producers creating a house track to be played in clubs may make a "seven or eight-minute 12-inch mix "; if the track is intended to be played on the radio, a "three-and-a-half-minute" radio edit is used. [21] House tracks build up slowly, by adding layers of sound and texture, and by increasing the volume. [19] House tracks may have vocals like a pop song, but some are "completely minimal instrumental music ". [19] If a house track does have vocals, the vocal lines may also be simple "words or phrases" that are repeated. [19] Origins of the term "house"[ edit ] House music pioneers Alan King, Robert Williams and Derrick Carter. One book from 2009 states the name "house music" originated from a Chicago club called the Warehouse that was open from 1977 to 1982. [22] Clubbers to the Warehouse were primarily black men, [23] who came to dance to music played by the club's resident DJ, Frankie Knuckles , who fans refer to as the "godfather of house". Frankie began the trend of splicing together different records when he found that the records he had were not long enough to satisfy his audience of dancers. [24] After the Warehouse closed in 1983, eventually the crowds went to Knuckles' new club, The Power House, later to be called The Power Plant, [22] and the club was renamed, yet again, into Music Box with Ron Hardy as the resident DJ. [25] The 1986 documentary, "House Music in Chicago", by filmmaker, Phil Ranstrom , captured opening night at The Power House, and stands as the only film or video to capture a young Frankie Knuckles in this early era, right after his departure from The Warehouse. [26] [27] [28] [29] In the Channel 4 documentary Pump Up the Volume, Knuckles remarks that the first time he heard the term "house music" was upon seeing "we play house music" on a sign in the window of a bar on Chicago's South Side . One of the people in the car joked, "you know that's the kind of music you play down at the Warehouse!" [30] In self-published statements, South-Side Chicago DJ Leonard "Remix" Rroy claimed he put such a sign in a tavern window because it was where he played music that one might find in one's home; in his case, it referred to his mother's soul and disco records, which he worked into his sets. [31] Chicago house artist Farley "Jackmaster" Funk was quoted as saying, "In 1982, I was DJing at a club called The Playground and there was this kid named Leonard 'Remix' Rroy who was a DJ at a rival club called The Rink. He came over to my club one night, and into the DJ booth and said to me, 'I've got the gimmick that's gonna take all the people out of your club and into mine – it's called House music.' Now, where he got that name from or what made him think of it I don't know, so the answer lies with him." [32] Chicago artist Chip E. 's 1985 song "It's House" may also have helped to define this new form of electronic music. [33] However, Chip E. himself lends credence to the Knuckles association, claiming the name came from methods of labeling records at the Importes Etc. record store, where he worked in the early 1980s. Bins of music that DJ Knuckles played at the Warehouse nightclub were labelled "As Heard at the Warehouse" in the store, which was shortened to simply "House". Patrons later asked for new music for the bins, which Chip E. implies was a demand the shop tried to meet by stocking newer local club hits. [34] In a 1986 interview, when Rocky Jones, the club DJ who ran Chicago-based DJ International Records , was asked about the "house" moniker, he did not mention Importes Etc., Frankie Knuckles, or the Warehouse by name. However, he agreed that "house" was a regional catch-all term for dance music, and that it was once synonymous with older disco music before it became a way to refer to "new" dance music. [35] Larry Heard , a.k.a. "Mr. Fingers", claims that the term "house" came from DJs creating music in their house or at home using synthesizers and drum machines, such as the Roland TB-303, [36] Roland TR-808, and TR-909. [37] These synthesizers were used to create the acid house subgenre. [38] Juan Atkins , a pioneer of Detroit techno , claims the term "house" reflected the association of particular tracks with particular clubs and DJs, considered their "house" records. [39] Main article: House dance At least three styles of dancing are associated with early house music: jacking , footwork and lofting. [40] These styles include a variety of techniques and sub-styles, including skating, stomping, vosho, pouting cat, and shuffle steps (also see Melbourne shuffle ). [41] [42] House music dancing styles can include movements from many other forms of dance, such as waacking , voguing , capoeira , jazz dance , Lindy Hop , tap dance , and even modern dance . [43] [42] House dancing is associated with a complete freedom of expression. [44] One of the primary elements in house dancing is "the jack" or "jacking" — a style created in the early days of Chicago house that left its trace in numerous record titles such as "Time to Jack" by Chip E. from the Jack Trax EP (1985), "Jack'n the House" (1985) by Farley "Jackmaster" Funk (1985) or " Jack Your Body " by Steve "Silk" Hurley (1986). It involves moving the torso forward and backward in a rippling motion matching the beat of the music, as if a wave were passing through it. [44] Social and political aspects[ edit ] Early house lyrics contained generally positive, uplifting messages, but spoke especially to those who were considered to be outsiders, especially African Americans, Latinos, and the gay subculture. The house music dance scene was one of the most integrated and progressive spaces in the 1980s; the black and gay populations, as well as other minority groups, were able to dance together in a positive environment. [45] House music DJs aimed to create a "dream world of emotions" with "stories, keywords and sounds", which helped to "glue" communities together. [16] Many house tracks encourage the audience to "release yourself" or "let yourself go", which is further encouraged by the continuous dancing, "incessant beat", and use of club drugs , which can create a trance -like effect on dancers. [16] Frankie Knuckles once said that the Warehouse club in Chicago was like "church for people who have fallen from grace". House record producer Marshall Jefferson compared it to "old-time religion in the way that people just get happy and screamin'". [44] The role of a house DJ has been compared to a "secular type of priest". [16] Some house lyrics contained messages calling for equality, unity, and freedom of expression beyond racial or sexual differences (e.g. " Can You Feel It " by Fingers Inc. , 1987, or "Follow Me" by Aly-Us , 1992). Later on in the 1990s, independently from the Chicago scene, the idea of Peace, Love, Unity & Respect (PLUR) became a widespread set of principles for the rave culture. [46] History[ edit ] Influences and precursors[ edit ] One of the main influences of house was disco, house music having been defined as a genre which "...picked up where disco left off in the late 1970's." [47] [48] Like disco DJs, house DJs used a "slow mix" to "lin[k] records together" into a mix. [16] In the post-disco club culture during the early 1980s, DJs from the gay scene made their tracks "less pop-oriented", with a more mechanical, repetitive beat and deeper basslines, and many tracks were made without vocals, or with wordless melodies. [49] Disco became so popular by the late 1970s that record companies pushed even non-disco artists (R&B and soft rock acts, for example) to record disco songs. When the backlash against disco started, known as " Disco Demolition Night ", held in Chicago , ironically the city where house music would be created a few years later, dance music went from being produced by major labels to being created by DJs in the underground club scene. That is until several years later by 1988, when major labels would begin signing acts from this new dance genre. [16] While disco was associated with lush orchestration, with string orchestra , flutes and horn sections , various disco songs incorporated sounds produced with synthesizers and electronic drum machines, and some compositions were entirely electronic; examples include Italian composer Giorgio Moroder 's late 1970s productions such as Donna Summer 's hit single " I Feel Love " from 1977, Kraftwerk's "' The Man-Machine " album from 1978, [50] Cerrone 's " Supernature " (1977), [51] Yellow Magic Orchestra 's synth-disco-pop productions from Yellow Magic Orchestra (1978) or Solid State Survivor (1979), [52] [53] and several early 1980s productions by hi-NRG groups like Lime , Trans-X and Bobby O . Frankie Knuckles (pictured in 2012) played an important role in developing house music in Chicago during the 1980s. Also important for the development of house were audio mixing and editing techniques earlier explored by disco, garage music and post-disco DJs, record producers , and audio engineers such as Walter Gibbons , Tom Moulton , Jim Burgess , Larry Levan , M & M , and others. While most post-disco disc jockeys primarily stuck to playing their conventional ensemble and playlist of dance records, Frankie Knuckles and Ron Hardy, two influential DJs of house music, were known for their unusual and non-mainstream playlists and mixing. Knuckles, often credited as "the Godfather of House" and resident DJ at the Warehouse club in Chicago from 1977 to 1982, worked primarily with early disco music with a hint of new and different post-punk or post-disco music. [54] Knuckles started out as a disco DJ, but when he moved from New York City to Chicago, he changed from the typical disco mixing style of playing records one after another; instead, he mixed different songs together, including Philadelphia soul and Euro disco . [19] He also explored adding a drum machine and a reel-to-reel tape player so he could create new tracks, often with a boosted deep register and faster tempos. Knuckles said: " Kraftwerk were main components in the creation of house music in Chicago. Back in the early 80s, I mixed our 80s Philly sound with the electro beats of Kraftwerk and the Electronic body music bands of Europe." [19] [55] Ron Hardy produced unconventional DIY mixtapes which he later played straight-on in the successor of the Warehouse, the Music Box (reopened and renamed in 1983 after Knuckles left). Like Frankie Knuckles, Hardy "combined certain sounds, remixing tracks with added synths and drum machines", all "refracted through the futurist lens of European music." [17] Marshall Jefferson , who would later appear with the 1986 house classic " Move Your Body (The House Music Anthem) " (originally released on Trax Records ), describes how he got involved in house music after hearing Ron Hardy's music in the Music Box: "I wasn't even into dance music before I went to the Music Box [...]. I was into rock and roll . We would get drunk and listen to rock and roll. We didn't give a fuck, we were like 'Disco Sucks!' and all that. I hated dance music 'cos I couldn't dance. I thought dance music was kind of wimpy, until I heard it at like Music Box volume." Marshall Jefferson [56] A precursor to house music is the Colonel Abrams hit song " Trapped ", which was produced by Richard James Burgess in 1984 [57] and has been referred to as a proto -house track and a precursor to garage house . [58] Rachel Cain, better known as Screamin' Rachael , co-founder of the highly influential house label Trax Records, was previously involved in the burgeoning punk scene. Cain cites industrial music (another genre pioneered in Chicago) and post-punk record store Wax Trax! Records (later a record label) as an important connection between the ever-changing underground sounds of Chicago. The electronic instrumentation and minimal arrangement of Charanjit Singh 's Synthesizing: Ten Ragas to a Disco Beat (1982), an album of Indian ragas performed in a disco style and anticipated the sounds of acid house music, but it is not known to have had any influence on the genre prior to the album's rediscovery in the 21st century. [59] [60] [61] According to Hillegonda C. Rietveld, "elements of hip hop and rap can be found in contemporary house tracks", with hip hop acting as an "accent or inflection" that is inserted into the house sound. [16] The constant bass drum in house music may have arisen from DJs experimenting with adding drum machines to their live mixes at clubs, underneath the records they were playing. [62] 1980s: Chicago house, acid house and deep house[ edit ] An honorary street name sign in Chicago for house music and the seminal DJ Frankie Knuckles . In the early 1980s, Chicago radio jocks Hot Mix 5 from WBMX radio station (among them Farley "Jackmaster" Funk), and club DJs Ron Hardy and Frankie Knuckles played a range of styles of dance music, including older disco records (mostly Philly disco and Salsoul [63] tracks), electro funk tracks by artists such as Afrika Bambaataa , [8] newer Italo disco , Arthur Baker , and John Robie , and electronic pop . [1] Some DJs made and played their own edits of their favorite songs on reel-to-reel tape, and sometimes mixed in electronic effects , drum machines, synthesizers and other rhythmic electronic instrumentation. The hypnotic electronic dance song "On and On", produced in 1984 by Chicago DJ Jesse Saunders and co-written by Vince Lawrence , had typical elements of the early house sound, such as the Roland TB-303 bass synthesizer and minimal vocals, as well as a Roland TR-808 drum machine and a Korg Poly-61 synthesizer. It also utilized the bassline from Player One's disco record " Space Invaders " (1979). [64] "On and On" is sometimes cited as the "first house record", [65] [66] even though it was a remake of a Disco Bootleg "On and On" by Florida producer Mach. Other examples from around that time, such as J.M. Silk 's " Music is the Key " (1985), have also been referred to as the first house tracks. [67] [68] Starting in 1985 and 1986, more and more Chicago DJs began producing and releasing original compositions. These compositions used newly affordable electronic instruments and enhanced styles of disco and other dance music they already favored. These homegrown productions were played on Chicago radio stations and in local clubs catering mainly to Black, Mexican American , and gay audiences. [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] [74] Subgenres of house, including deep house and acid house, quickly emerged and gained traction. [25] Deep house 's origins can be traced to Chicago producer Mr. Fingers 's relatively jazzy, soulful recordings " Mystery of Love " (1985) and "Can You Feel It?" (1986). [75] According to author Richie Unterberger, it moved house music away from its " posthuman tendencies back towards the lush" soulful sound of early disco music. [76] Acid house , a rougher and more abstract subgenre, arose from Chicago artists' experiments with the squelchy sounds of the Roland TB-303 bass synthesizer that define the genre. Its origin on vinyl is generally cited as Phuture 's " Acid Tracks " (Trax Records, 1987). Phuture, a group founded by Nathan " DJ Pierre " Jones, Earl "Spanky" Smith Jr., and Herbert "Herb J" Jackson, is credited with having been the first to use the TB-303 in the house music context. [77] The group's 12-minute "Acid Tracks" was recorded to tape and played by DJ Ron Hardy at the Music Box, [78] supposedly already by 1985. [79] Hardy once played it four times over the course of an evening until the crowd responded favorably. [80] Club play of house tracks by pioneering Chicago DJs such as Ron Hardy and Lil Louis , local dance music record shops such as Importes Etc., State Street Records, Loop Records, Gramaphone Records and the popular Hot Mix 5 shows on radio station WBMX-FM helped popularize house music in Chicago. Later, visiting DJs and producers from Detroit fell into the genre. Trax Records and DJ International Records, Chicago labels with wider distribution, helped popularize house music inside and outside of Chicago. The first major success of house music outside the U.S. is considered to be Farley "Jackmaster" Funk's " Love Can't Turn Around " (feat. Jesse Saunders and performed by Darryl Pandy ), which peaked at #10 in the UK singles chart in 1986. Around that time, UK record labels started releasing house music by Chicago acts, but as the genre grew popular, the UK itself became one of the new hot spots for house, acid house and techno music, experiencing the so-called second summer of love between 1988 and 1989. [25] Detroit and techno[ edit ] Main articles: Detroit techno and techno In Detroit during the early and mid-1980s, a new kind of electronic dance music began to emerge around Juan Atkins, Derrick May and Kevin Saunderson , known as the Belleville Three . The artists fused eclectic, futuristic sounds into a signature Detroit dance sound that was a main influence for the later techno genre. Their music included strong influences from Chicago house , although the term "house" played a less important role in Detroit than in Chicago, and the term "techno" was established instead. [81] One of their most successful hits was a vocal house track named " Big Fun " by Inner City , a group produced by Kevin Saunderson, in 1988. Another major and even earlier influence on the Detroit artists was electronic music in the tradition of Germany's Kraftwerk. [82] Atkins had released electro music in that style with his group Cybotron as early as 1981. Cybotron's best known songs are "Cosmic Cars" (1982) and "Clear" (1983); a 1984 release was titled "Techno City". In 1988, Atkins produced the track "Techno Music", which was featured on an influential compilation that was initially planned to be named "The House Sound of Detroit", but was renamed into " Techno! The New Dance Sound of Detroit " after Atkins' song. [83] The 1987 song " Strings of Life " by Derrick May (under the name Rhythm Is Rhythm) represented a darker, more intellectual strain of early Detroit electronic dance music. It is considered a classic in both the house and techno genre and shows the connection [84] and the "boundary between house and techno." [85] It made way to what was later known as "techno" in the internationally known sense of the word, referring to a harder, faster, colder, more machine-driven and minimal sound than house, as played by Detroit's Underground Resistance and Jeff Mills . UK: Acid house, rave culture and the Second Summer of Love[ edit ] See also: Second Summer of Love and rave A badge bearing a smiley , a symbol of the 1980s acid house scene in the UK [86] With house music already important in the 1980s dance club scene, eventually house penetrated the UK singles chart. London DJ "Evil" Eddie Richards spun at dance parties as resident at the Clink Street club. Richards' approach to house focuses on the deep basslines. Nicknamed the UK's "Godfather of House", he and Clink co-residents Kid Batchelor and Mr. C played a key role in early UK house. House first charted in the UK in Wolverhampton following the success of the Northern Soul scene. The record generally credited as the first house hit in the UK was Farley "Jackmaster" Funk's "Love Can't Turn Around", which reached #10 in the UK singles chart in September 1986. [87] In January 1987, Chicago DJ/artist Steve "Silk" Hurley's "Jack Your Body" reached number one in the UK, showing it was possible for house music to achieve crossover success in the main singles chart. The same month also saw Raze enter the top 20 with "Jack the Groove", and several other house hits reached the top ten that year. Stock Aitken Waterman (SAW) expensively-produced productions for Mel and Kim , including the number-one hit "Respectable", added elements of house to their previous Europop sound. SAW session group Mirage scored top-ten hits with "Jack Mix II" and "Jack Mix IV", medleys of previous electro and Europop hits rearranged in a house music style. Key labels in the rise of house music in the UK included:[ citation needed ] Jack Trax, which specialized in licensing US club hits for the British market (and released an influential series of compilation albums ) Rhythm King , which was set up as a hip hop label but also issued house records Jive Records ' Club Records imprint In March 1987, the UK tour of influential US DJs such as Knuckles, Jefferson, Fingers Inc. (Heard), and Adonis on the DJ International Tour boosted house's popularity in the UK. Following the success of MARRS ' " Pump Up The Volume " in October, from 1987 to 1989, UK acts such as The Beatmasters , Krush , Coldcut , Yazz , Bomb The Bass , S-Express , and Italy's Black Box opened the doors to house music success on the UK charts. Early British house music quickly set itself apart from the original Chicago house sound. Many of the early hits were based on sample montage, and unlike the US soulful vocals, in UK house, rap was often used for vocals (far more than in the US), and humor and wit was an important element.[ citation needed ] The second best-selling British single of 1988 was an acid house record, the Coldcut-produced " The Only Way Is Up " by Yazz. [88] [89] One of the early club anthems, " Promised Land " by Joe Smooth , was covered and charted within a week by UK band The Style Council . Europeans embraced house, and began booking important American house DJs to play at the big clubs, such as Ministry of Sound , whose resident, Justin Berkmann brought in US pioneer Larry Levan. [90] The house music club scene in cities such as Birmingham , Leeds , Sheffield , Wolverhampton , and London were provided with dance tracks by many underground pirate radio stations. Club DJs also brought in new house styles, which helped bolster this music genre. The earliest UK house and techno record labels, such as Warp Records and Network Records (formed out of Kool Kat records), helped introduce American and later Italian dance music to Britain. These labels also promoted UK dance music acts. By the end of the 1980s, UK DJs Jenö, Thomas, Markie and Garth moved to San Francisco and called their group the Wicked Crew. The Wicked Crew's dance sound transmitted UK styles to the US, which helped to trigger the birth of the US west coast's rave scene. [91] The manager of Manchester's Factory nightclub and co-owner of The Haçienda , Tony Wilson , also promoted acid house culture on his weekly TV show. The UK midlands also embraced the late 1980s house scene with illegal parties and raves and more legal dance clubs such as The Hummingbird. [92] Chicago's second wave: Hip house and ghetto house[ edit ] Main articles: Hip house and ghetto house While the acid house hype spawned in the UK and Europe, in Chicago it reached its peak around 1988 and then declined in popularity.[ citation needed ] Instead, a crossover of house and hip-hop music, known as hip house , became popular. Tyree Cooper 's single "Turn Up the Bass" featuring Kool Rock Steady from 1988 was an influential breakthrough for this subgenre, although the British trio the Beatmasters claimed having invented the genre with their 1986 release " Rok da House ".[ citation needed ] Another notable figure in the hip house scene was Fast Eddie with "Hip House" and "Yo Yo Get Funky!" (both 1988). Even Farley "Jackmaster" Funk engaged in the genre, releasing "Free at Last", a song to free James Brown from jail that featured The Hip House Syndicate, in 1989, and producing a Real Hip House compilation on his label, House Records, in 1990. [93] The early 1990s saw new Chicago house artists emerge, such as Armando Gallop , who had released seminal acid house records since 1987, but became even more influential by co-founding the new Warehouse nightclub in Chicago (on 738 W. Randolph Street [94] ) in which he also was resident DJ from 1992 until 1994, and founding Warehouse Records in 1988. [95] Another important figure during the early to mid-1990s and until the 2000s was DJ and producer Paul Johnson , who released the Warehouse-anthem "Welcome to the Warehouse" on Armando's label in 1994 in collaboration with Armando himself. [96] He also had part in the development of an entirely new kind of Chicago house sound, " ghetto house ", which was prominently released and popularized through the Dance Mania record label. It was originally founded by Jesse Saunders in 1985 but passed on to Raymond Barney in 1988. It featured notable ghetto house artists like DJ Funk , DJ Deeon , DJ Milton, Paul Johnson and others. The label is regarded as hugely influential in the history of Chicago house music, and has been described as "ghetto house's Motown ". [97] One of the prototypes for Dance Mania's new ghetto house sound was the single "(It's Time for the) Percolator" by Cajmere, also known as Green Velvet , from 1992. [98] Cajmere started the labels Cajual Records and Relief Records, the latter combining the sound of Chicago, acid, and ghetto house with the harder sound of techno. By the early 1990s, artists of note on those two labels included Dajae , DJ Sneak , Derrick Carter , DJ Rush , Paul Johnson, Joe Lewis, and Glenn Underground. New York and New Jersey: Garage house and the "Jersey sound"[ edit ] Main articles: Garage house and New Jersey house Building in New York City where the Paradise Garage nightclub was located While house became popular in UK and continental Europe, the scene in the US had still not progressed beyond a small number of clubs in Chicago, Detroit, New York City, and Newark . In New York and Newark, the terms " garage house ", "garage music", or simply "garage", and "Jersey sound", or " New Jersey house ", were coined for a deeper, more soulful, R&B -derived subgenre of house that was developed in the Paradise Garage nightclub in New York City and Club Zanzibar in Newark, New Jersey, during the early-to-mid 1980s. It is argued that garage house predates the development of Chicago house, as it is relatively closer to disco than other dance styles. [99] As Chicago house gained international popularity, New York and New Jersey's music scene was distinguished from the "house" umbrella. [99] [100] In comparison to other forms of house music, garage house, and Jersey sound include more gospel -influenced piano riffs and female vocals. [101] The genre was popular in the 1980s in the United States and in the 1990s in the United Kingdom. [101] DJs playing it include Tony Humphries at Club Zanzibar, Larry Levan, who was resident DJ at the Paradise Garage from 1977 to 1987, Todd Terry , Kerri Chandler , Masters at Work , Junior Vasquez , and others. [102] In the late 1980s, Nu Groove Records launched and nurtured the careers of Rheji Burrell and Rhano Burrell, collectively known as Burrell (after a brief stay on Virgin America via Timmy Regisford and Frank Mendez). Nu Groove also had a stable of other NYC underground scene DJs. The Burrells created the "New York Underground" sound of house, and they did more than 30 releases on this label featuring this sound. The emergence of New York's DJ and producer Todd Terry in 1988 demonstrated the continuum from the underground disco approach to a new and commercially successful house sound. Terry's cover of Class Action's "Weekend" (mixed by Larry Levan) shows how Terry drew on newer hip-hop influences, such as the quicker sampling and the more rugged basslines. [103] [ citation needed ] See also: Balearic beat House was also being developed by DJs and record producers in the booming dance club scene in Ibiza , notably when DJ Alfredo , the father of Balearic house , began his residency at Amnesia in 1983. [ when? ] While no house artists or labels came from Ibiza at the time, mixing experiments and innovations done by Ibiza DJs helped to influence the house style. By the mid-1980s, a distinct Balearic mix of house was discernible. Several influential clubs in Ibiza, such as Amnesia, with DJ Alfredo at the decks, were playing a mix of rock, pop, disco, and house. These clubs, fuelled by their distinctive sound and copious consumption of the club drug Ecstasy (MDMA), began to influence the British scene. By late 1987, DJs such as Trevor Fung, Paul Oakenfold and Danny Rampling were bringing the Ibiza sound to key UK clubs such as the Haçienda in Manchester. Ibiza influences also spread to DJs working London clubs, such as Shoom in Southwark, Heaven , Future, and Spectrum. [104] Other regional scenes[ edit ] This photo of a deep house DJ shows the pair of turntables and the DJ mixer in between. By the late 1980s, house DJing and production had moved to the US's west coast, particularly to San Francisco, Oakland, Los Angeles, Fresno, San Diego, and Seattle. Los Angeles saw an explosion of underground raves, where DJs mixed dance tracks. Los Angeles DJs Marques Wyatt and Billy Long spun at Jewel's Catch One . In 1989, the Los-Angeles-based former EBN-OZN singer/rapper Robert Ozn started indie house label One Voice Records. Ozn released the Mike "Hitman" Wilson remix of Dada Nada 's "Haunted House", which garnered club and mix show radio play in Chicago, Detroit, and New York as well as in the UK and France. The record went up to number five on the Billboard Club Chart, marking it as the first house record by a white (Caucasian) artist to chart in the US. Dada Nada, the moniker for Ozn's solo act, did his first releases in 1990, using a jazz-based deep house style. The Frankie Knuckles and David Morales remix of Dada Nada's "Deep Love" (One Voice Records in the US, Polydor in the UK), featuring Ozn's lush, crooning vocals and jazzy improvisational solos by muted trumpet, underscored deep house's progression into a genre that integrated jazz and pop songwriting and song forms (unlike acid house and techno).[ citation needed ] The Twilight Zone (1980–89) located on Richmond Street in Toronto's entertainment district was the first after hours club to regularly feature New York and Chicago DJs that first spun house music in Canada. [105] The venue was the first international gig destination for both Frankie Knuckles and David Morales. One of the club's owners, Tony Assoon, would make regular trips to New York in order to purchase funk, underground disco and house records to play on his regular Saturday night slot. [106] The Montreal Scene[ edit ] Historically deeply influenced by musical trends coming from England, France, and the US, Montreal has developed a distinct house music scene. Shaped more specifically by the impact of UK's techno scene, [107] France's French Touch movement, and American DJs and club owners such as Angel Moraes, [108] David Morales, [109] and Danny Tenaglia, [110] the city has evolved to become a distinct dance music hub. [111] Ever since the middle of the 1990s and early 2000s, an ever-growing number of house music festivals take place in the city throughout the year, including Igloofest , Nuit blanche, Piknic Electronik , Mutek , Ile Soniq , Montréal Pride , and the Black and Blue festival.
Roland TB-303 : The bass line synthesizer that was used prominently in acid house . By 1988, house music had exploded in the UK, and acid house was increasingly popular. [50] There was also a long-established warehouse party subculture based around the sound system scene. In 1988, the music played at warehouse parties was predominantly house. That same year, the Balearic party vibe associated with Ibiza-based DJ Alfredo Fiorito was transported to London, when Danny Rampling and Paul Oakenfold opened the clubs Shoom and Spectrum, respectively. Both night spots quickly became synonymous with acid house, and it was during this period that the use of MDMA , as a party drug, started to gain prominence. Other important UK clubs at this time included Back to Basics in Leeds , Sheffield's Leadmill and Music Factory, and in Manchester The Haçienda , where Mike Pickering and Graeme Park's Friday night spot, Nude, was an important proving ground for American underground [59] dance music . Acid house party fever escalated in London and Manchester, and it quickly became a cultural phenomenon. MDMA-fueled club goers, faced with 2 A.M. closing hours, sought refuge in the warehouse party scene that ran all night. To escape the attention of the press and the authorities, this after-hours activity quickly went underground. Within a year, however, up to 10,000 people at a time were attending the first commercially organized mass parties, called raves, and a media storm ensued. [60] The success of house and acid house paved the way for wider acceptance of the Detroit sound, and vice versa: techno was initially supported by a handful of house music clubs in Chicago, New York, and Northern England, with London clubs catching up later; [61] but in 1987, it was "Strings of Life" which eased London club-goers into acceptance of house, according to DJ Mark Moore. [62] [63] The New Dance Sound of Detroit[ edit ] Main article: Techno! The New Dance Sound of Detroit The mid-1988 UK release of Techno! The New Dance Sound of Detroit, [64] [65] an album compiled by ex- Northern Soul DJ and Kool Kat Records boss Neil Rushton (at the time an A&R scout for Virgin's "10 Records" imprint) and Derrick May, introduced of the word techno to UK audiences. [4] [5] Although the compilation put techno into the lexicon of music journalism in the UK, the music was initially viewed as Detroit's interpretation of Chicago house rather than as a separate genre. [5] [66] The compilation's working title had been The House Sound of Detroit until the addition of Atkins' song "Techno Music" prompted reconsideration. [64] [67] Rushton was later quoted as saying he, Atkins, May, and Saunderson came up with the compilation's final name together, and that the Belleville Three voted down calling the music some kind of regional brand of house; they instead favored a term they were already using, techno. [5] [67] [68] Derrick May views this as one of his busiest times and recalls that it was a period where he I was working with Carl Craig , helping Kevin, helping Juan, trying to put Neil Rushton in the right position to meet everybody, trying to get Blake Baxter endorsed so that everyone liked him, trying to convince Shake ( Anthony Shakir ) that he should be more assertive... and keep making music as well as do the Mayday mix (for the show Street Beat on Detroit's WJLB radio station) and run Transmat records. [64] Commercially, the release did not fare as well and failed to recoup , but Inner City's production " Big Fun " (1988), a track that was almost not included on the compilation, became a crossover hit in fall 1988. [69] The record was also responsible for bringing industry attention to May, Atkins and Saunderson, which led to discussions with ZTT records about forming a techno supergroup called Intellex. But, when the group were on the verge of finalising their contract, May allegedly refused to agree to Top of the Pops appearances and negotiations collapsed. [70] According to May, ZTT label boss Trevor Horn had envisaged that the trio would be marketed as a "black Petshop Boys ." [71] Despite Virgin Records ' disappointment with the poor sales of Rushton's compilation, [72] the record was successful in establishing an identity for techno and was instrumental in creating a platform in Europe for both the music and its producers. [73] Ultimately, the release served to distinguish the Detroit sound from Chicago house and other forms of underground dance music that were emerging during the rave era of the late 1980s and early 1990s, a period during which techno became more adventurous and distinct. [74] [75] Music Institute[ edit ] In mid-1988, developments in the Detroit scene led to the opening of a nightclub called the Music Institute (MI), located at 1315 Broadway in downtown Detroit. The venue was secured by George Baker and Alton Miller with Darryl Wynn and Derrick May participating as Friday night DJs, and Baker and Chez Damier playing to a mostly gay crowd on Saturday nights. The club closed on 24 November 1989, with Derrick May playing "Strings of Life" along with a recording of clock tower bells. [76] May explains: It all happened at the right time by mistake, and it didn't last because it wasn't supposed to last. Our careers took off right around the time we [the MI] had to close, and maybe it was the best thing. I think we were peaking – we were so full of energy and we didn't know who we were or [how to] realize our potential. We had no inhibitions, no standards, we just did it. That's why it came off so fresh and innovative, and that's why ... we got the best of the best. [76] Though short-lived, MI was known internationally for its all-night sets, its sparse white rooms, and its juice bar stocked with " smart drinks " (the Institute never served liquor). The MI, notes Dan Sicko, along with Detroit's early techno pioneers, "helped give life to one of the city's important musical subcultures – one that was slowly growing into an international scene." [76] See also: Tresor (club) , Love Parade , Hardcore techno , Gabber , Electronic body music , and Trance music Doorway to Dorian Gray in Frankfurt , venue of the dance event Technoclub by Talla 2XLC In 1982, while working at Frankfurt's City Music record store, DJ Talla 2XLC started to use the term techno to categorize artists such as Depeche Mode , Front 242 , Heaven 17 , Kraftwerk and New Order , with the word used as shorthand for technologically created dance music. Talla's categorization became a point of reference for other DJs, including Sven Väth . [77] [78] Talla further popularized the term in Germany when he founded Technoclub at Frankfurt's No Name Club in 1984, which later moved to the Dorian Gray club in 1987. [77] [78] Talla's club spot served as the hub for the regional EBM and electronic music scene, and according to Jürgen Laarmann , of Frontpage magazine, it had historical merit in being the first club in Germany to play almost exclusively EDM. [79] Frankfurt tape scene[ edit ] Inspired by Talla's music selection, in the early 80s several young artists from Frankfurt started to experiment on cassette tapes with electronic music coming from the City Music record store, mixing the latest catalogue with additional electronic sounds and pitched BPM. This became known as the Frankfurt tape scene. The Frankfurt tape scene evolved around the early and experimental work done by the likes of Tobias Freund, Uwe Schmidt , Lars Müller and Martin Schopf. [80] Some of the work done by Andreas Tomalla, Markus Nikolai and Thomas Franzmann evolved in collaborative work under the Bigod 20 collective. While this early work was strongly characterized as experimental electronic music fused with strong EBM, krautrock , synth-pop and technopop influences, the later work during the mid and late 1980s clearly transitioned to a clear techno sound. Influence of Chicago and Detroit[ edit ] By 1987 a German party scene based around the Chicago sound was well established.[ citation needed ] In the late 1980s, acid house also established itself in West Germany as a new trend in clubs and discotheques. [81] [ better source needed ] In 1988, the Ufo opened in West Berlin , an illegal venue for acid house parties, which existed until 1990. [82] [ unreliable source? ] In Munich at this time, the Negerhalle (1983–1989) and the ETA-Halle established themselves as the first acid house clubs in temporarily used, dilapidated industrial halls, marking the beginning of the so-called "hall culture" in Germany. [83] [84] In July 1989 Dr. Motte and Danielle de Picciotto organized the first Love Parade in West Berlin, just a few months before the Fall of the Berlin Wall . [85] Growth of German scene[ edit ] The original Tresor club (1991–2005) Following the fall of the Berlin Wall on 9 November 1989 and the German reunification in October 1990, free underground techno parties mushroomed in East Berlin . [82] East German DJ Paul van Dyk has remarked that techno was a major force in reestablishing social connections between East and West Germany during the unification period. [86] In the now reunified Berlin, several locations opened near the foundations of the Berlin Wall in the former eastern part of the city from 1991 onwards: the Tresor (est. 1991), the Planet (1991–1993), the Bunker (1992–1996), and the E-Werk (1993–1997). [87] [88] It was in Tresor at this time that a trend in paramilitary clothing was established (amongst the techno fraternity) by DJ Tanith ; [89] possibly as an expression of a commitment to the underground aesthetic of the music, or perhaps influenced by UR 's paramilitary posturing. [90] In the same period, German DJs began intensifying the speed and abrasiveness of the sound, as an acid infused techno began transmuting into hardcore . [91] DJ Tanith commented at the time that "Berlin was always hardcore, hardcore hippie , hardcore punk, and now we have a very hardcore house sound." [87] This emerging sound is thought to have been influenced by Dutch gabber and Belgian hardcore; styles that were in their own perverse way paying homage to Underground Resistance and Richie Hawtin's Plus 8 Records . Other influences on the development of this style were European electronic body music (EBM) groups of the mid-1980s such as DAF , Front 242 , and Nitzer Ebb . [92] Tanith in 1994 Changes were also taking place in Frankfurt during the same period but it did not share the egalitarian approach found in the Berlin party scene. It was instead very much centered around discothèques and existing arrangements with various club owners. In 1988, after the Omen opened, the Frankfurt dance music scene was allegedly dominated by the club's management and they made it difficult for other promoters to get a start. By the early 1990s Sven Väth had become perhaps the first DJ in Germany to be worshipped like a rock star. He performed center stage with his fans facing him, and as co-owner of Omen, he is believed to have been the first techno DJ to run his own club. [79] One of the few real alternatives then was The Bruckenkopf in Mainz , underneath a Rhine bridge, a venue that offered a non-commercial alternative to Frankfurt's discothèque -based clubs. Other notable underground parties were those run by Force Inc. Music Works and Ata & Heiko from Playhouse records ( Ongaku Musik ). By 1992 DJ Dag & Torsten Fenslau were running a Sunday morning session at Dorian Gray , a plush discothèque near the Frankfurt airport . They initially played a mix of different styles including Belgian new beat , Deep House , Chicago House, and synth-pop such as Kraftwerk and Yello and it was out of this blend of styles that the Frankfurt trance scene is believed to have emerged. [79] In 1990, the Babalu Club , the first afterhours techno  club in Germany, opened in Munich and was a place for the formation of the southern German techno scene, where protagonists such as DJ Hell , Monika Kruse , Tom Novy or Woody came together. [83] [84] [93] In 1993–94 rave became a mainstream music phenomenon in Germany, seeing with it a return to "melody, New Age elements, insistently kitsch harmonies and timbres". This undermining of the German underground sound lead to the consolidation of a German "rave establishment," spearheaded by the party organisation Mayday , with its record label Low Spirit , WestBam , Marusha , and a music channel called VIVA . At this time the German popular music charts were riddled with Low Spirit "pop-Tekno" German folk music reinterpretations of tunes such as "Somewhere Over The Rainbow" and "Tears Don't Lie", many of which became hits. At the same time, in Frankfurt, a supposed alternative was a music characterized by Simon Reynolds as "moribund, middlebrow Electro-Trance music, as represented by Frankfurt's own Sven Väth and his Harthouse label." [94] Illegal raves, however, regained importance in the German techno scene as a countermovement to the commercial mass raves in the mid-1990s. [95] Tekkno versus techno[ edit ] In Germany, fans started to refer to the harder techno sound emerging in the early 1990s as Tekkno (or Brett). [82] This alternative spelling, with varying numbers of ks, began as a tongue-in-cheek attempt to emphasize the music's hardness, but by the mid-1990s it came to be associated with a controversial point of view that the music was and perhaps always had been wholly separate from Detroit's techno, deriving instead from a 1980s EBM-oriented club scene cultivated in part by DJ/musician Talla 2XLC in Frankfurt. [69] At some point tension over "who defines techno" arose between scenes in Frankfurt and Berlin. DJ Tanith has expressed that Techno as a term already existed in Germany but was to a large extent undefined. Dimitri Hegemann has stated that the Frankfurt definition of techno associated with Talla's Technoclub differed from that used in Berlin. [79] Frankfurt's Armin Johnert viewed techno as having its roots in acts such DAF, Cabaret Voltaire , and Suicide , but a younger generation of club goers had a perception of the older EBM and Industrial as handed down and outdated. The Berlin scene offered an alternative and many began embracing an imported sound that was being referred to as Techno-House. The move away from EBM had started in Berlin when acid house became popular, thanks to Monika Dietl's radio show on SFB 4 . Tanith distinguished acid-based dance music from the earlier approaches, whether it be DAF or Nitzer Ebb, because the latter was aggressive, he felt that it epitomized "being against something," but of acid house he said, "it's electronic, it's fun it's nice." [79] By Spring 1990, Tanith, along with Wolle XDP , an East-Berlin party organizer responsible for the X-tasy Dance Project, were organizing the first large scale rave events in Germany. This development would lead to a permanent move away from the sound associated with Techno-House and toward a hard edged mix of music that came to define Tanith and Wolle's Tekknozid parties. According to Wolle it was an "out and out rejection of disco values," instead they created a "sound storm" and encouraged a form of "dance floor socialism," where the DJ was not placed in the middle and you "lose yourself in light and sound." [79] Developments[ edit ] As the techno sound evolved in the late 1980s and early 1990s, it also diverged to such an extent that a wide spectrum of stylistically distinct music was being referred to as techno. This ranged from relatively pop oriented acts such as Moby [96] to the distinctly anti-commercial sentiments [97] of Underground Resistance . Derrick May's experimentation on works such as Beyond the Dance (1989) and The Beginning (1990) were credited with taking techno "in dozens of new directions at once and having the kind of expansive impact John Coltrane had on Jazz". [98] The Birmingham -based label Network Records label was instrumental in introducing Detroit techno to British audiences. [99] By the early 1990s, the original techno sound had garnered a large underground following in the United Kingdom , Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium . The growth of techno's popularity in Europe between 1988 and 1992 was largely due to the emergence of the rave scene and a thriving club culture. [74] American exodus[ edit ] In the United States during the early 90s, apart from regional scenes in Detroit, New York City , Chicago and Orlando, interest in techno was limited. Many Detroit based producers, frustrated by the lack of opportunity in the US, looked to Europe for a future livelihood. [100] This first wave of Detroit expatriates was soon joined by a so-called "second wave" that included Carl Craig, Octave One , Jay Denham, Kenny Larkin , Stacey Pullen , and UR 's Jeff Mills , Mike Banks , and Robert Hood . In the same period, close to Detroit ( Windsor, Ontario ), Richie Hawtin , with business partner John Acquaviva , launched the techno imprint Plus 8 Records. A number of New York producers also made an impression in Europe at this time, most notably Frankie Bones , Lenny Dee, and Joey Beltram . [101] These developments in American-produced techno between 1990 and 1992 fueled the expansion and eventual divergence of techno in Europe, particularly in Germany. [102] [103] In Berlin , the club Tresor which had opened in 1991 for a time was the standard bearer for techno and played host to many of the leading Detroit producers, some of whom had relocated to Berlin. [104] The club brought new life to the careers of Detroit artists such as Santonio Echols, Eddie Fowlkes and Blake Baxter, who played there alongside established Berlin DJs such as Dr. Motte and Tanith. According to Dan Sicko, "Germany's growing scene in the early 1990s was the beginning of techno's decentralization", and "techno began to create its second logical center in Berlin". At this time, the now reunified Berlin also began to regain its position as the musical capital of Germany. [105] Although eclipsed by Germany, Belgium was another focus of second-wave techno in this time period. The Ghent -based label R&S Records embraced harder-edged techno by "teenage prodigies" like Beltram and C.J. Bolland , releasing "tough, metallic tracks...with harsh, discordant synth lines that sounded like distressed Hoovers," according to one music journalist. [106] In the United Kingdom, Sub Club which opened in Glasgow in 1987, [107] [ better source needed ] and Trade which opened its doors to Londoners in 1990, were venues which helped bring techno into the country.[ citation needed ] Trade has been referred to as the 'original all night bender'. [108] A Techno Alliance[ edit ] In 1993, the German techno label Tresor Records released the compilation album Tresor II: Berlin & Detroit – A Techno Alliance, [109] a testament to the influence of the Detroit sound upon the German techno scene and a celebration of a "mutual admiration pact" between the two cities. [103] As the mid-1990s approached, Berlin was becoming a haven for Detroit producers; Jeff Mills and Blake Baxter even resided there for a time. In the same period, with the assistance of Tresor, Underground Resistance released their X-101/X-102/X103 album series, Juan Atkins collaborated with 3MB's Thomas Fehlmann and Moritz Von Oswald [103] and Tresor-affiliated label Basic Channel had its releases mastered by Detroit's National Sound Corporation, the main mastering house for the entire Detroit dance music scene. In a sense, popular electronic music had come full circle, returning to Germany, home of a primary influence on the EDM of the 1980s: Düsseldorf 's Kraftwerk. The dance sounds of Chicago and Detroit also had another German connection, as it was in Munich that Giorgio Moroder and Pete Bellotte first produced the synthesizer-generated Eurodisco sound, including the seminal four-on-the-floor track I Feel Love . [110] [82] Main article: Minimal techno Robert Hood, techno minimalist, in 2009 As techno continued to transmute a number of Detroit producers began to question the trajectory the music was taking. One response came in the form of so-called minimal techno (a term producer Daniel Bell found difficult to accept, finding the term minimalism, in the artistic sense of the word, too "arty"). [111] It is thought that Robert Hood , a Detroit-based producer and one time member of UR, is largely responsible for ushering in the minimal strain of techno. [112] Hood describes the situation in the early 1990s as one where techno had become too "ravey" , with increasing tempos, the emergence of gabber , and related trends straying far from the social commentary and soul -infused sound of original Detroit techno. In response, Hood and others sought to emphasize a single element of the Detroit aesthetic, interpreting techno with "a basic stripped down, raw sound. Just drums, basslines and funky grooves and only what's essential. Only what is essential to make people move". [113] Hood explains: I think Dan [Bell] and I both realized that something was missing – an element ... in what we both know as techno. It sounded great from a production point of standpoint, but there was a 'jack' element in the [old] structure. People would complain that there's no funk, no feeling in techno anymore, and the easy escape is to put a vocalist and some piano on top to fill the emotional gap. I thought it was time for a return to the original underground. [114] See also: Jazz , Jazz fusion , and Musical improvisation Some techno has also been influenced by or directly infused with elements of jazz. [115] This led to increased sophistication in the use of both rhythm and harmony in a number of techno productions. [116] Manchester (UK)-based techno act 808 State helped fuel this development with tracks such as " Pacific State " [117] and "Cobra Bora" in 1989. [118] Detroit producer Mike Banks was heavily influenced by jazz, as demonstrated on the influential Underground Resistance release Nation 2 Nation (1991). [119] By 1993, Detroit acts such as Model 500 and UR had made explicit references to the genre, with the tracks "Jazz Is The Teacher" (1993) [106] and "Hi-Tech Jazz" (1993), the latter being part of a larger body of work and group called Galaxy 2 Galaxy , a self-described jazz project based on Kraftwerk's "man machine" doctrine. [119] [120] This lead was followed by a number of techno producers in the UK who were influenced by both jazz and UR, Dave Angel 's "Seas of Tranquility" EP (1994) being a case in point, [121] [122] Other notable artists who set about expanding upon the structure of "classic techno" include Dan Curtin, Morgan Geist, Titonton Duvante and Ian O'Brien. [123] See also: Intelligent dance music , ambient techno , and bleep techno In 1991 UK music journalist Matthew Collin wrote that "Europe may have the scene and the energy, but it's America which supplies the ideological direction...if Belgian techno gives us riffs, German techno the noise, British techno the breakbeats, then Detroit supplies the sheer cerebral depth." [124] By 1992 a number of European producers and labels began to associate rave culture with the corruption and commercialization of the original techno ideal. [125] Following this the notion of an intelligent or Detroit inspired pure techno aesthetic began to take hold. Detroit techno had maintained its integrity throughout the rave era and was pushing a new generation of so-called intelligent techno producers forward. Simon Reynolds suggests that this progression "involved a full-scale retreat from the most radically posthuman and hedonistically functional aspects of rave music toward more traditional ideas about creativity, namely the auteur theory of the solitary genius who humanizes technology." [126] The term intelligent techno was used to differentiate more sophisticated versions of underground techno [127] from rave-oriented styles such as breakbeat hardcore , Schranz, Dutch Gabber . Warp Records was among the first to capitalize upon this development with the release of the compilation album Artificial Intelligence [128] Of this time, Warp founder and managing director Steve Beckett said the dance scene was changing and we were hearing B-sides that weren't dance but were interesting and fitted into experimental, progressive rock, so we decided to make the compilation Artificial Intelligence, which became a milestone ... it felt like we were leading the market rather than it leading us, the music was aimed at home listening rather than clubs and dance floors: people coming home, off their nuts and having the most interesting part of the night listening to totally tripped out music. The sound fed the scene. [129] Warp had originally marketed Artificial Intelligence using the description electronic listening music but this was quickly replaced by intelligent techno. In the same period (1992–93) other names were also bandied about such as armchair techno, ambient techno , and electronica , [130] but all referred to an emerging form of post-rave dance music for the "sedentary and stay at home". [131] Following the commercial success of the compilation in the United States, Intelligent Dance Music eventually became the name most commonly used for much of the experimental dance music emerging during the mid-to-late 1990s. Although it is primarily Warp that has been credited with ushering the commercial growth of IDM and electronica, in the early 1990s there were many notable labels associated with the initial intelligence trend that received little, if any, wider attention. Amongst others they include: Black Dog Productions (1989), Carl Craig's Planet E (1991), Kirk Degiorgio's Applied Rhythmic Technology (1991), Eevo Lute Muzique (1991), General Production Recordings (1991), In 1993, a number of new "intelligent techno"/"electronica" record labels emerged, including New Electronica, Mille Plateaux , 100% Pure (1993) and Ferox Records (1993). See also: Free tekno , Freetekno , Teknival , Free Party , Acid techno , and DIY culture A sound system at Czechtek 2004 In the early 1990s a post-rave, DIY , free party scene had established itself in the UK. It was largely based around an alliance between warehouse party goers from various urban squat scenes and politically inspired new age travellers . The new agers offered a readymade network of countryside festivals that were hastily adopted by squatters and ravers alike. [132] Prominent among the sound systems operating at this time were Exodus in Luton, Tonka in Brighton , Smokescreen in Sheffield , DiY in Nottingham , Bedlam, Circus Warp, LSDiesel and London's Spiral Tribe . The high point of this free party period came in May 1992 when with less than 24 hours notice and little publicity more than 35,000 gathered at the Castlemorton Common Festival for 5 days of partying. [133] This one event was largely responsible for the introduction in 1994 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act ; [134] effectively leaving the British free party scene for dead. Following this many of the traveller artists moved away from Britain to Europe, the US, Goa in India , Koh Phangan in Thailand and Australia's East Coast. [133] In the rest of Europe, due in some part to the inspiration of traveling sound systems from the UK, [133] rave enjoyed a prolonged existence as it continued to expand across the continent . [102] Spiral Tribe, Bedlam and other English sound systems took their cooperative techno ideas to Europe, particularly Eastern Europe where it was cheaper to live, and audiences were quick to appropriate the free party ideology. It was European Teknival free parties, such as the annual Czechtek event in the Czech Republic that gave rise to several French, German and Dutch sound systems. Many of these groups found audiences easily and were often centered around squats in cities such as Amsterdam and Berlin . [133] See also: List of electronic music genres By 1994 there were a number of techno producers in the UK and Europe building on the Detroit sound, but a number of other underground dance music styles were by then vying for attention. Some drew upon the Detroit techno aesthetic, while others fused components of preceding dance music forms. This led to the appearance (in the UK initially) of inventive new music that sounded far-removed from techno. For instance jungle ( drum and bass ) demonstrated influences ranging from hip hop , soul, and reggae to techno and house. With an increasing diversification (and commercialization) of dance music, the collectivist sentiment prominent in the early rave scene diminished, each new faction having its own particular attitude and vision of how dance music (or in certain cases, non-dance music) should evolve. According to Muzik magazine, by 1995 the UK techno scene was in decline and dedicated club nights were dwindling. The music had become "too hard, too fast, too male, too drug-oriented, too anally retentive." Despite this, weekly night at clubs such as Final Frontier (London), The Orbit (Leeds), House of God ( Birmingham ), Pure (Edinburgh, whose resident DJ Twitch later founded the more eclectic Optimo ), and Bugged Out (Manchester) were still popular. With techno reaching a state of "creative palsy," and with a disproportionate number of underground dance music enthusiasts more interested in the sounds of rave and jungle, in 1995 the future of the UK techno scene looked uncertain as the market for "pure techno" waned. Muzik described the sound of UK techno at this time as "dutiful grovelling at the altar of American techno with a total unwillingness to compromise." [135] By the end of the 1990s, a number of post-techno [136] underground styles had emerged, including ghettotech (a style that combines some of the aesthetics of techno with hip-hop and house music), nortec , glitch , digital hardcore , electroclash [1] and so-called no-beat techno. [137] In attempting to sum up the changes since the heyday of Detroit techno, Derrick May has since revised his famous quote in stating that "Kraftwerk got off on the third floor and now George Clinton's got Napalm Death in there with him. The elevator's stalled between the pharmacy and the athletic wear store." [71] Commercial exposure[ edit ] Underworld during a live performance While techno and its derivatives only occasionally produce commercially successful mainstream acts— Underworld and Orbital being two better-known examples—the genre has significantly affected many other areas of music. In an effort to appear relevant, many established artists, for example Madonna and U2 , have dabbled with dance music, yet such endeavors have rarely evidenced a genuine understanding or appreciation of techno's origins with the former proclaiming in January 1996 that "Techno=Death". [138] [139] [140] Rapper Missy Elliott exposed the popular music audience to the Detroit techno sound when she featured material from Cybotron's Clear on her 2006 release "Lose Control"; this resulted in Juan Atkins ' receiving a Grammy Award nomination for his writing credit. Elliott's 2001 album Miss E... So Addictive also clearly demonstrated the influence of techno inspired club culture. [141] In the late 90s the publication of relatively accurate histories by authors Simon Reynolds (Generation Ecstasy, also known as Energy Flash) and Dan Sicko (Techno Rebels), plus mainstream press coverage of the Detroit Electronic Music Festival in the 2000s, helped diffuse some of the genre's more dubious mythology. [142] Even the Detroit-based company Ford Motors eventually became savvy to the mass appeal of techno, noting that "this music was created partly by the pounding clangor of the Motor City's auto factories. It became natural for us to incorporate Detroit techno into our commercials after we discovered that young people are embracing techno." With a marketing campaign targeting under-35s, Ford used "Detroit Techno" as a print ad slogan and chose Model 500's "No UFO's" to underpin its November 2000 MTV television advertisement for the Ford Focus . [143] [144] [145] [146] Antecedents[ edit ] Early use of the term 'Techno'[ edit ] In 1977, Steve Fairnie and Bev Sage formed an electronica band called the Techno Twins in London, England. When Kraftwerk first toured Japan, their music was described as "technopop" by the Japanese press. [147] The Japanese band Yellow Magic Orchestra used the word 'techno' in a number of their works such as the song "Technopolis" (1979), the album Technodelic (1981), and a flexi disc EP, "The Spirit of Techno" (1983). [148] When Yellow Magic Orchestra toured the United States in 1980, they described their own music as technopop, and were written up in Rolling Stone Magazine . [149] Around 1980, the members of YMO added synthesizer backing tracks to idol songs such as Ikue Sakakibara 's "Robot", and these songs were classified as 'techno kayou' or 'bubblegum techno.'[ citation needed ] In 1985, Billboard reviewed the Canadian band Skinny Puppy 's album, and described the genre as techno dance. [150] Juan Atkins himself said "In fact, there were a lot of electronic musicians around when Cybotron started, and I think maybe half of them referred to their music as 'techno.' However, the public really wasn't ready for it until about '85 or '86. It just so happened that Detroit was there when people really got into it." [151] Proto-techno[ edit ] The popularity of Eurodisco and Italo disco —referred to as progressive in Detroit—and new romantic synth-pop in the Detroit high school party scene from which techno emerged [152] has prompted a number of commentators to try to redefine the origins of techno by incorporating musical precursors to the Detroit sound as part of a wider historical survey of the genre's development. [15] [153] [154] The search for a mythical "first techno record" leads such commentators to consider music from long before the 1988 naming of the genre. Aside from the artists whose music was popular in the Detroit high school scene ("progressive" disco acts such as Giorgio Moroder, Alexander Robotnick , and Claudio Simonetti synth-pop artists such as Visage , New Order, Depeche Mode, The Human League , and Heaven 17 ), they point to examples such as "Sharevari" (1981) by A Number of Names, [155] danceable selections from Kraftwerk (1977–83), the earliest compositions by Cybotron (1981), Moroder ’s "From Here to Eternity" (1977), and Manuel Göttsching 's "proto-techno masterpiece" [154] E2-E4 (1981). The Eurodisco song I Feel Love , produced by Giorgio Moroder for Donna Summer in 1976, has been described as a milestone and blueprint for EDM because it was the first to combine repetitive synthesizer loops with a continuous four-on-the-floor bass drum and an off-beat hi-hat, which would become a main feature of techno and house ten years later. [156] [110] [157] Another example is a record entitled Love in C minor, released in 1976 by Parisian Eurodisco producer Jean-Marc Cerrone ; cited as the first so called "conceptual disco" production and the record from which house, techno, and other underground dance music styles flowed. [158] Yet another example is Yellow Magic Orchestra's work which has been described as "proto-techno" [159] [160] Around 1983, Sheffield band Cabaret Voltaire began including funk and EDM elements into their sound, and in later years, would come to be described as techno. Nitzer Ebb was an Essex band formed in 1982, which also showed funk and EDM influence on their sound around this time. The Danish band Laid Back released " White Horse " in 1983 with a similar funky electronica sound. Prehistory[ edit ] Certain electro- disco and European synth-pop productions share with techno a dependence on machine-generated dance rhythms, but such comparisons are not without contention. Efforts to regress further into the past, in search of earlier antecedents, entails a further regression, to the sequenced electronic music of Raymond Scott , whose "The Rhythm Modulator," "The Bass-Line Generator," and "IBM Probe" are considered early examples of techno-like music. In a review of Scott's Manhattan Research Inc. compilation album the English newspaper The Independent suggested that "Scott's importance lies mainly in his realization of the rhythmic possibilities of electronic music , which laid the foundation for all electro-pop from disco to techno." [161] In 2008, a tape from the mid-to-late 1960s by the original composer of the Doctor Who theme Delia Derbyshire , was found to contain music that sounded remarkably like contemporary EDM. Commenting on the tape, Paul Hartnoll , of the dance group Orbital , described the example as "quite amazing," noting that it sounded not unlike something that "could be coming out next week on Warp Records ." [162] Music production practice[ edit ] Stylistic considerations[ edit ] In general, techno is very DJ -friendly, being mainly instrumental (commercial varieties being an exception) and is produced with the intention of its being heard in the context of a continuous DJ set , wherein the DJ progresses from one record to the next via a synchronized segue or "mix." [163] Much of the instrumentation in techno emphasizes the role of rhythm over other musical parameters, but the design of synthetic timbres , and the creative use of music production technology in general, are important aspects of the overall aesthetic practice. Unlike other forms of EDM that tend to be produced with synthesizer keyboards , techno does not always strictly adhere to the harmonic practice of Western music and such strictures are often ignored in favor of timbral manipulation alone. [164] The use of motivic development (though relatively limited) and the employment of conventional musical frameworks is more widely found in commercial techno styles, for example euro-trance , where the template is often an AABA song structure . [165] The main drum part is almost universally in common time (4/4); meaning 4 quarter note pulses per bar. [166] In its simplest form, time is marked with kicks ( bass drum beats) on each quarter-note pulse, a snare or clap on the second and fourth pulse of the bar, with an open hi-hat sound every second eighth note. This is essentially a drum pattern popularized by disco (or even polka ) and is common throughout house and trance music as well. The tempo tends to vary between approximately 120 bpm (quarter note equals 120 pulses per minute) and 150 bpm, depending on the style of techno. Some of the drum programming employed in the original Detroit-based techno made use of syncopation and polyrhythm , yet in many cases the basic disco-type pattern was used as a foundation, with polyrhythmic elaborations added using other drum machine voices. This syncopated-feel ( funkiness ) distinguishes the Detroit strain of techno from other variants. It is a feature that many DJs and producers still use to differentiate their music from commercial forms of techno, the majority of which tend to be devoid of syncopation. Derrick May has summed up the sound as 'Hi-tech Tribalism': something "very spiritual, very bass oriented, and very drum oriented, very percussive. The original techno music was very hi-tech with a very percussive feel... it was extremely, extremely Tribal. It feels like you're in some sort of hi-tech village." [145] Compositional techniques[ edit ] Example of a professional production environment There are many ways to create techno, but the majority will depend upon the use of loop-based step sequencing as a compositional method. Techno musicians, or producers , rather than employing traditional compositional techniques , may work in an improvisatory fashion, [167] often treating the electronic music studio as one large instrument. The collection of devices found in a typical studio will include units that are capable of producing many different sounds and effects. Studio production equipment is generally synchronized using a hardware- or computer-based MIDI sequencer , enabling the producer to combine in one arrangement the sequenced output of many devices. A typical approach to using this type of technology compositionally is to overdub successive layers of material while continuously looping a single measure or sequence of measures. This process will usually continue until a suitable multi-track arrangement has been produced. [168] Once a single loop-based arrangement has been generated, a producer may then focus on developing how the summing of the overdubbed parts will unfold in time, and what the final structure of the piece will be. Some producers achieve this by adding or removing layers of material at appropriate points in the mix. Quite often, this is achieved by physically manipulating a mixer , sequencer, effects, dynamic processing , equalization , and filtering while recording to a multi-track device. Other producers achieve similar results by using the automation features of computer-based digital audio workstations . Techno can consist of little more than cleverly programmed rhythmic sequences and looped motifs combined with signal processing of one variety or another, frequency filtering being a commonly used process. A more idiosyncratic approach to production is evident in the music of artists such as Twerk and Autechre , where aspects of algorithmic composition are employed in the generation of material. Retro technology[ edit ] The Roland TR-808 was, according to Derrick May , the preferred drum machine during the early years of techno. [169] Instruments used by the original techno producers based in Detroit, many of which are highly sought after on the retro music technology market, include classic drum machines like the Roland TR-808 and TR-909 , devices such as the Roland TB-303 bass line generator, and synthesizers such as the Roland SH-101 , Kawai KC10, Yamaha DX7 , and Yamaha DX100 (as heard on Derrick May's seminal 1987 techno release Nude Photo). [98] Much of the early music sequencing was executed via MIDI (but neither the TR-808 nor the TB-303 had MIDI, only DIN sync ) using hardware sequencers such as the Korg SQD1 and Roland MC-50, and the limited amount of sampling that was featured in this early style was accomplished using an Akai S900 . [170] By the mid-1990s TR-808 and TR-909 drum machines had already achieved legendary status, a fact reflected in the prices sought for used devices. During the 1980s, the 808 became the staple beat machine in Hip hop production while the 909 found its home in House music and techno. It was "the pioneers of Detroit techno [who] were making the 909 the rhythmic basis of their sound, and setting the stage for the rise of Roland's vintage Rhythm Composer." In November 1995 the UK music technology magazine Sound on Sound noted: [171] There can be few hi-tech instruments which still command a second-hand price only slightly lower than their original selling price 10 years after their launch. Roland's now near-legendary TR-909 is such an example—released in 1984 with a retail price of £999, they now fetch up to £900 on the second-hand market! The irony of the situation is that barely a year after its launch, the 909 was being 'chopped out' by hi-tech dealers for around £375, to make way for the then-new TR-707 and TR-727. Prices hit a new low around 1988, when you could often pick up a second-user 909 for under £200—and occasionally even under £100. Musicians all over the country are now garrotting themselves with MIDI leads as they remember that 909 they sneered at for £100—or worse, the one they sold for £50 (did you ever hear the one about the guy who gave away his TB-303 Bassline—now worth anything up to £900 from true loony collectors—because he couldn't sell it?) By May 1996, Sound on Sound was reporting that the popularity of the 808 had started to decline, with the rarer TR-909 taking its place as "the dance floor drum machine to use." This is thought to have arisen for a number of reasons: the 909 gives more control over the drum sounds, has better programming and includes MIDI as standard. Sound on Sound reported that the 909 was selling for between £900 and £1100 and noted that the 808 was still collectible, but maximum prices had peaked at about £700 to £800. [172] Despite this fascination with retro music technology, according to Derrick May "there is no recipe, there is no keyboard or drum machine which makes the best techno, or whatever you want to call it. There never has been. It was down to the preferences of a few guys. The 808 was our preference. We were using Yamaha drum machines, different percussion machines, whatever." [169] Emulation[ edit ] In the latter half of the 1990s the demand for vintage drum machines and synthesizers motivated a number of software companies to produce computer-based emulators. One of the most notable was the ReBirth RB-338 , produced by the Swedish company Propellerhead and originally released in May 1997. [173] Version one of the software featured two TB-303s and a TR-808 only, but the release of version two saw the inclusion of a TR-909. A Sound on Sound review of the RB-338 V2 in November 1998 noted that Rebirth had been called "the ultimate techno software package" and mentions that it was "a considerable software success story of 1997". [174] In America Keyboard Magazine asserted that ReBirth had "opened up a whole new paradigm : modeled analog synthesizer tones, percussion synthesis, pattern-based sequencing, all integrated in one piece of software". [175] Despite the success of ReBirth RB-338, it was officially taken out of production in September 2005. Propellerhead then made it freely available for download from a website called the "ReBirth Museum". The site also features extensive information about the software's history and development. [176] In 2001, Propellerhead released Reason V1, a software-based electronic music studio, comprising a 14-input automated digital mixer, 99-note polyphonic 'analogue' synth, classic Roland-style drum machine, sample-playback unit, analogue-style step sequencer, loop player, multitrack sequencer, eight effects processors, and over 500 MB of synthesizer patches and samples. With this release Propellerhead were credited with "creating a buzz that only happens when a product has really tapped into the zeitgeist , and may just be the one that many [were] waiting for." [177] Reason is as of 2018 at version 10. [178] Technological advances[ edit ] During the mid-to-late 1990s, as computer technology became more accessible and music software advanced, interacting with music production technology was possible using means that bore little relationship to traditional musical performance practices: [179] for instance, laptop performance (laptronica) [180] and live coding . [181] [182] By the mid-2000s a number of software-based virtual studio environments had emerged, with products such as Propellerhead's Reason and Ableton Live finding popular appeal. [183] Also during this period software versions of classic devices, that once existed exclusively in the hardware domain, became available for the first time. These software-based music production tools offered viable and cost-effective alternatives to typical hardware-based production studios, and thanks to continued advances in microprocessor technology, it became possible to create high quality music using little more than a single laptop computer. Using highly configurable software tools artists could also easily tailor their production sound by creating personalized software synthesizers, effects modules, and various composition environments. Some of the more popular programs for achieving such ends included commercial releases such as Max/Msp and Reaktor and freeware packages such as Pure Data , SuperCollider , and ChucK . In a certain sense this technological innovation lead to the resurgence of the DIY mentality that was once central to dance music culture. [184] [185] [186] [187] In the 00s these advances democratized music creation and lead to a significant increase in the amount of home-produced music available to the general public via the internet. [188] Notable techno venues[ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate. (November 2021) ( ) Berlin's Berghain techno club In Germany, noted techno clubs of the 1990s include Tresor and E-Werk in Berlin, Omen and Dorian Gray in Frankfurt, Ultraschall and KW – Das Heizkraftwerk in Munich as well as Stammheim in Kassel. [189] In 2007, Berghain was cited as "possibly the current world capital of techno, much as E-Werk or Tresor were in their respective heydays". [190] In the 2010s, aside from Berlin, Germany continued to have a thriving techno scene with clubs such as Gewölbe in Cologne , Institut für Zukunft in Leipzig , MMA Club and Blitz Club in Munich, Die Rakete in Nuremberg and Robert Johnson in Offenbach am Main . [191] [192] In the United Kingdom, Glasgow's Sub Club has been associated with techno since the early 1990s and clubs such as London's Fabric and Egg London have gained notoriety for supporting techno. [193] In the 2010s, a techno scene also emerged in Georgia, with the Bassiani in Tbilisi being the most notable venue. [194]
Toggle the table of contents Trance music From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of electronic dance music This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . Learn how and when to remove this template message ) This article possibly contains original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (June 2016) ( Cultural origins Late 1980s – early 1990s in Western Europe (United Kingdom, [6] Germany, [4] [7] [8] Belgium, and Netherlands) Subgenres Trance is a genre of electronic dance music [11] that emerged from EBM in Frankfurt, Germany , in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and quickly spread throughout Europe. [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] Trance music is typically characterized by a tempo between 120 and 150 beats per minute (BPM), [7] repeating melodic phrases [7] and a musical form that distinctly builds tension and elements throughout a track often culminating in 1 to 2 "peaks" or "drops". [7] Although trance is a genre of its own, it liberally incorporates influences from other musical styles such as techno , [4] [2] house , [1] [2] chill-out , [4] classical music , [4] [5] tech house , ambient and film scores . [5] A trance is a state of hypnotism and heightened consciousness . [19] This is portrayed in trance music by the mixing of layers with distinctly foreshadowed build-up and release. A common characteristic of modern trance music is a mid-song climax followed by a soft breakdown disposing of beats and percussion entirely, [4] [7] leaving the melody or atmospherics to stand alone for an extended period before gradually building up again. Trance tracks are often lengthy to allow for such progression and commonly have sufficiently sparse opening and closing sections to facilitate mixing by DJs . [4] [7] Trance is mostly instrumental , although vocals can be mixed in: typically they are performed by mezzo-soprano to soprano female soloists, mostly without a traditional verse/chorus structure. Structured vocal form in trance music forms the basis of the vocal trance subgenre, which has been described as "grand, soaring, and operatic" and "ethereal female leads floating amongst the synths". However, male singers, such as Jonathan Mendelsohn, are also featured. [20] [21] Trance Energy Festival at Utrecht Psychedelic trance culture of KaZantip in 2006, with decorations commonplace at trance parties The KLF 's " What Time is Love? (Pure Trance)" was released in the UK in 1988.  The earliest years of Trance were defined by Frankfurt labels such as Eye Q , Harthouse , Fax +49-69/450464 , Force Inc., and others. Producers such as Pete Namlook , Oliver Lieb , and Rolf Ellmer created noteworthy tracks such as "Eternal Spirit" by 4Voice, "Hearts" by L.S.G. , and "We Came In Peace" by Dance 2 Trance . [22] [23] Much of the development of trance can be traced to Sven Vath, who was heavily influenced by his experiences traveling to Goa where DJs were using psychedelic rock and other sounds to induce a trance state at beach parties. [24] Vath , Dag Lerner, and Torsten Fenslau had an affection for hypnotic dance sounds and the music at Dorian Gray and Omen began to reflect this. [25] Vath launched Eye Q with Heinz Roth and Matthias Hoffman in 1991, followed by Harthouse in 1992, releasing some of the most well-known trance tracks of the era. Eye Q took a softer approach to trance with records such as Cygnus X 's "The Orange Theme," Brainchild's "Symmetry" and Vernon's "Wonderer." Harthouse focused on a harder trance sound with tracks such as Quicksand by Spicelab , Spectrum by Metal Master, Human by Resistance D, and Acperience by Hardfloor . [22] [23] The sound of Frankfurt was the sound of trance. DJ Dag Lerner, one half of Dance to Trance has stated that he was the first to call his music trance and "gave the child his name." [26] The genre got its name from the trance-like state the music attempted to emulate in the 1990s before the genre's focus changed. [27] In a 2006 interview with Resident Advisor, Sven Vath acknowledged the role of his labels Eye Q and Harthouse in helping to create what people know as trance music today, going on to say that "people are getting a wrong interpretation of what trance music is all about" and differentiating his own form from modern forms saying "They are following a format -- always producing the same structure. It's a pop format for trance." [28] As German Trance made its way back to Goa, a new subgenre emerged that was more organic in sound with an oriental aesthetic in its melodies, often with references to Eastern philosophy. Goa trance would go on to spawn many sub-genres of its own, including psytrance, psybreaks, and others. [29] In 1991 in Berlin, MFS Records began to gain a trance profile, signing Mijk van Dijk, Cosmic Baby, and Paul van Dyk, soon releasing some of the most well-known early trance tracks such as Love Stimulation by Humate and Perfect Day by Visions of Shiva, as well as perhaps the first ever trance compilation, Tranceformed From Beyond. [30] While writer Bom Coen traces the roots of trance to Paul van Dyk 's 1993 remix of Humate's "Love Stimulation", [1] there is little evidence to support this contention. In fact, van Dyk's own Trance roots can be traced further back to his work with Visions of Shiva, van Dyk's trance project with Cosmic Baby coming earlier. [31] Early on, Paul van Dyk had been relatively sidelined on the scene, but his collaboration with Cosmic Baby quickly led him into the heart of the scene. [32] In the UK, the British approach to trance music and house music was similar: progressive chord structures, crescendos, longer breakdowns, and more organic instruments. [33] In 1993 Platipus Records was launched by Simon Berry as an outlet for Barry's various projects, including Union Jack , Clanger, Art of Trance. Platipus would become one of the most consequential progressive trance labels. Another influential label of progressive trance was Hooj Choons with notable trance releases from artists Tilt , Oliver Lieb , Solarstone , as well as the well-known Three N' One remix of Cafe Del Mar by Energy 52 . In Germany, a harder sub-genre of trance emerged. With a faster tempo and gated pads, hard trance introduced the breakdown-build-anthem template that would become nearly ubiquitous in later trance sub-genres. Hard trance would inspire hardhouse , hard uplifting, jumpstyle , NRG, and hardstyle . Perhaps the best known label for this subgenre of trance was Bonzai Records , a sublabel of Lightning Records with notable tracks including Jones & Stephenson 's The First Rebirth, Cherry Moon Trax's The House of House, [34] Blue Alphabet's Cybertrance [35] to name a few. Aly & Fila , Egyptian trance music band performing By the late 1990s, uplifting took over the scene with its fast tempo, characteristic builds, long breakdowns and big drops. [36] In the early 2000s, pop-style vocals began being added into the music. [4] The development of another subgenre, epic trance, finds some of its origins in classical music, [4] with film music also being influential. [5] Trance was arguably at its commercial peak in the second part of 1990s and early 2000s. [37] [38] Afterwards, popular trance music providers such as Armin van Buuren's A State of Trance , Paul van Dyk , and Above & Beyond remained popular, while lesser known DJs changed to other sounds. [39] In 2017 a new wave of underground DJs such as Nina Kraviz began incorporating trance music into their sets. [39] [40] In 2023, an effort by John 00 Fleming and others led Beatport to split their trance genre category into two: Trance (Main Floor) and Trance (Raw/Deep/Hypnotic). The latter designed for the underground side of the genre. [41] Production[ edit ] Roland JP-8000 , a synthesizer famous for its incorporation of the supersaw waveform Trance employs a 4/4 time signature , [7] generally a tempo of 125 to 150 BPM , [7] [36] though the music can be any tempo, and 16 or 32 beat phrases . [42] A kick drum is usually placed on every downbeat and a regular open hi-hat is often placed on the upbeat . [7] Extra percussive elements are usually added, and in recent years major transitions, builds or climaxes are often foreshadowed by lengthy "snare rolls"—a quick succession of snare drum hits that build in velocity, frequency, and volume towards the end of a measure. [7] A Simple arpeggiated (Roland JP-8000) Supersaw waveform pattern with chorus and flanging (Some professionals used Lexicon Hall programs without pre-delay.) A trancegate pattern at 141 bpm as it is heard on a software trancegate using a Roland JP-8000 with the supersaw waveform and minor EQ edits. The gated pattern gradually changes to demonstrate the various rhythms possible with a trance gate. Note that some trancegate patterns are off-beat. Rapid arpeggios and minor keys are common features of trance, the latter being almost universal.[ citation needed ] Trance tracks often use one central " hook ", or melody, which runs through almost the entire song, repeating at intervals anywhere between 2 beats and 32 bars, in addition to harmonies and motifs in different timbres from the central melody. [7] Instruments are added or removed every 4, 8, 16, or 32 bars. [7] In the section before the breakdown, the lead motif is often introduced in a sliced up and simplified form, [7] to give the audience a "taste" of what they will hear after the breakdown. [7] Then later, the final climax is usually "a culmination of the first part of the track mixed with the main melodic reprise". [7] As is the case with many dance music tracks, trance tracks are usually built with sparser intros ("mix-ins") and outros ("mix-outs") to enable DJs to blend them together immediately. [4] [7] EDM-infused forms designed for festival main stages often incorporate other styles and elements of electronic music such as electro and progressive house into its production. It emphasizes harsher basslines and drum beats which decrease the importance of offbeats and focus primarily on a four on the floor stylistic house drum pattern. The BPM of more recent styles tends to be on par with house music at 120 to 135 beats per minute. However, unlike house music, recent forms of Uplifting continue to feature melodic breakdowns and longer transitions. [43] Main articles: List of trance genres and List of electronic music genres Trance music is broken into a number of subgenres including acid trance , classic trance, hard trance , hardstyle (which is a fuse between hardcore and hard trance ), progressive trance , [4] and uplifting trance . [4] Uplifting trance is also known as "anthem trance", "epic trance", [4] "commercial trance",  "stadium trance", or "euphoric trance", [7] and has been strongly influenced by classical music in the 1990s [4] and 2000s by leading artists such as Ferry Corsten , Armin Van Buuren , Tiësto , Push , Rank 1 and at present with the development of the subgenre "orchestral uplifting trance" or "uplifting trance with symphonic orchestra" by such artists as Sound Apparel, Andy Blueman , Ciro Visone, Soundlift, Arctic Moon, and Sergey Nevone & Simon O'Shine, among others. Closely related to uplifting trance is Eurodance , which has become a general term for a wide variety of highly commercialized European dance music. Notably late in the 1990s, German producer ATB revolutionized the scene of the aforementioned Eurodance with his hit single " 9 PM (Till I Come) ". Several subgenres are crossovers with other major genres of electronic music. For instance, tech trance is a mixture of trance and techno, and vocal trance "combines [trance's] progressive elements with pop music". [4] The dream trance genre originated in the mid-1990s, with its popularity then led by Robert Miles , who composed Children in 1996. Recently, there is also a very small subgenre called "medieval trance", which combines medieval elements together with trance elements, e.g. Maestro Giano, Green Clouds and other artists, which are effectively a kind of "reverse Bardcore ". AllMusic states on progressive trance: "the progressive wing of the trance crowd led directly to a more commercial, chart-oriented sound since trance had never enjoyed much chart action in the first place. Emphasizing the smoother sound of Eurodance or house (and occasionally more reminiscent of Jean-Michel Jarre than Basement Jaxx ), Progressive Trance became the sound of the world's dance floors by the end of the millennium. Critics ridiculed its focus on predictable breakdowns and relative lack of skill to beat-mix, but progressive trance was caned by the hottest DJ." [44]
) Drum and bass The Amen break (waveform pictured) is considered the backbone of drum and bass. It is commonly used in songs under the genre. [1] [2] Stylistic origins experimental music An example of a D&B song in the subgenre of liquid D&B Drum and bass (commonly abbreviated as DnB, D&B, or D'n'B) is a genre of electronic dance music characterised by fast breakbeats (typically 165–185 beats per minute [4] [5] ) with heavy bass and sub-bass lines, [6] samples , and synthesizers . The genre grew out of the UK's jungle scene in the 1990s. [7] DJ Dextrous , a trailblazer in the early days of Jungle music, seen here showcasing his skills behind the decks during a performance in Switzerland in 2015. The popularity of drum and bass at its commercial peak ran parallel to several other UK dance styles. A major influence was the original Jamaican dub and reggae sound that influenced jungle 's bass-heavy sound. Another feature of the style is the complex syncopation of the drum tracks' breakbeat . [8] Drum and bass subgenres include breakcore , ragga jungle , hardstep , darkstep , techstep , neurofunk , ambient drum and bass, liquid funk (also known as liquid drum and bass), jump up, drumfunk, sambass , and drill 'n' bass . Drum and bass has been influenced by many other genres like hip hop , big beat , dubstep , house , trip hop , ambient music , techno , jazz , rock and pop . Drum and bass is dominated by a relatively small group of record labels. Major international music labels had shown very little interest in the drum and bass scene until BMG Rights Management acquired RAM in February 2016. [9] Since then, the genre has seen a significant growth in exposure. Whilst the origin of drum and bass music is in the UK, the genre has evolved considerably with many other prominent fanbases located all over the world. Adam F performs at Listen at Club Alchemy in New Haven , Connecticut , on September 3, 2006. See also: Breakbeat hardcore and hardcore jungle In the late 1980s and early 1990s, a growing nightclub and overnight outdoor event culture gave birth to new genres in the rave scene including breakbeat hardcore , darkcore , and hardcore jungle , which combined sampled syncopated beats, or breakbeats, and other samples from a wide range of different musical genres and, occasionally, samples of music, dialogue and effects from films and television programmes. From as early as 1991, tracks were beginning to strip away some of the heavier sampling and "hardcore noises" and create more bassline and breakbeat led tracks. Some tracks increasingly took their influence from reggae and this style would become known as hardcore jungle (later to become simply jungle ), whilst darkcore (with producers such as Goldie , Doc Scott , 4hero , and 2 Bad Mice ) were experimenting with sounds and creating a blueprint for drum and bass, especially noticeable by late 1993. By 1994, jungle had begun to gain mainstream popularity, and fans of the music (often referred to as junglists ) became a more recognisable part of youth subculture. The genre further developed, incorporating and fusing elements from a wide range of existing musical genres, including the raggamuffin sound, dancehall , MC chants, dub basslines, and increasingly complex, heavily edited breakbeat percussion. Despite the affiliation with the ecstasy -fuelled rave scene, jungle also inherited associations with violence and criminal activity, both from the gang culture that had affected the UK's hip-hop scene and as a consequence of jungle's often aggressive or menacing sound and themes of violence (usually reflected in the choice of samples). However, this developed in tandem with the often positive reputation of the music as part of the wider rave scene and dancehall-based Jamaican music culture prevalent in London. By 1995, whether as a reaction to, or independently of this cultural schism, some jungle producers began to move away from the ragga-influenced style and create what would become collectively labelled, for convenience, as drum and bass. [10] As the genre became generally more polished and sophisticated technically, it began to expand its reach from pirate radio to commercial stations and gain widespread acceptance (circa 1995–1997). It also began to split into recognisable subgenres such as hardstep , jump up, ragga, techstep, and what was known at the time as intelligent. As more melodic and often jazz-influenced subgenres of drum and bass called atmospheric or intelligent ( Blame and Blu Mar Ten ) and jazzstep ( 4Hero , Roni Size ) gained mainstream appeal, additional subgenres emerged including techstep in 1996, drawing influence from techno . The emergence of related styles such as liquid funk brought a wave of new artists (Carlito & Addiction, Solid State/ DJ Dextrous , Subject 13 and Fellowship being amongst the early pioneers to champion the sound) incorporating new ideas and techniques, supporting continual evolution of the genre. As of 2014 [update] , drum and bass makes frequent appearances in mainstream media and popular culture including in television , as well as being a major reference point for subsequent genres such as grime and dubstep , [11] and producing successful artists including Chase & Status , Netsky , Metrik , and Pendulum . Pitchfork noted a "rising zoomer affinity" for the genre in the 2020s. [12] Musical features[ edit ] Drum and bass incorporates a number of scenes and styles, from the highly electronic, industrial sounds of techstep to the use of conventional, acoustic instrumentation that characterise the more jazz-influenced end of the spectrum. [6] [13] The sounds of drum and bass are extremely varied due to the range of influences behind the music. Drum and bass could at one time be defined as a strictly electronic musical genre, with the only "live" element being the DJ's selection and mixing of records during a set. "Live" drum and bass using electric, electronic and acoustic instruments played by musicians on stage emerged over the ensuing years of the genre's development. [14] [15] [16] As a musical style built around funk or syncopated rock and roll breaks , James Brown , Al Green , Marvin Gaye , Ella Fitzgerald , Gladys Knight & the Pips , Billie Holiday , Aretha Franklin , Otis Redding , the Supremes , the Commodores , Jerry Lee Lewis , and even Michael Jackson acted as funk influences on the music. [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] Jazz pioneer Miles Davis has been named as a possible influence. [25] Blues artists such as Lead Belly , Robert Johnson , Charlie Patton , Muddy Waters and B.B King have also been cited by producers as inspirations. Even modern avant-garde composers such as Henryk Gorecki have received mention. [26] One of the most influential tracks in drum and bass history was "Amen Brother" by The Winstons , which contains a drum solo that has since become known as the " Amen break ", which, after being extensively used in early hip hop music, went on to become the basis for the rhythms used in drum and bass. [8] Kevin Saunderson released a series of bass-heavy, minimal techno cuts as Reese/The Reese Project in the late '80s, which were hugely influential in drum and bass. One of his more famous basslines (Reese – "Just Want Another Chance", Incognito Records, 1988) was indeed sampled on Renegade's Terrorist and countless others since, being known simply as the 'Reese' bassline. He followed these up with equally influential (and bassline-heavy) tracks in the UK hardcore style as Tronik House in 1991–1992. Another Detroit artist who was important to the scene was Carl Craig . The sampled-up jazz break on Craig's Bug in the Bassbin was also influential on the newly emerging sound. DJs at the Heaven nightclub on "Rage" nights used to play it as fast as their Technics record decks would go, pitching it up in the process. [27] By the late 1980s and early 1990s, the tradition of breakbeat use in hip hop production had influenced the sound of breakbeat hardcore , which in turn led to the emergence of jungle, drum and bass, and other genres that shared the same use of broken beats. [28] [29] Drum and bass shares many musical characteristics with hip-hop, though it is nowadays mostly stripped of lyrics. Grandmaster Flash , Roger Troutman , Afrika Bambaata , Run DMC , Mac Dre , Public Enemy , Schooly D , N.W.A , Kid Frost , Wu-Tang Clan , Dr. Dre , Mos Def , Beastie Boys and the Pharcyde are very often directly sampled, regardless of their general influence. [30] Clearly, drum and bass has been influenced by other music genres, though influences from sources external to the electronic dance music scene perhaps lessened following the shifts from jungle to drum and bass, and through to so-called "intelligent drum and bass" and techstep. [31] [32] [33] [34] It still remains a fusion music style. Some tracks are illegally remixed and released on white label (technically bootleg), often to acclaim. For example, DJ Zinc's remix of The Fugees ' " Ready or Not ", also known as "Fugee Or Not", was eventually released with the Fugees' permission after talk of legal action, though ironically, the Fugees' version infringed Enya 's copyright to an earlier song. [30] White labels, along with dubplates , played an important part in drum and bass musical culture. Sampling[ edit ] The Amen break was synonymous with early drum and bass productions but other samples have had a significant impact, including the Apache , Funky Drummer , "Soul Pride", "Scorpio" and " Think (About It) " breaks. [35] [36] Early pioneers often used Akai samplers and sequencers on the Atari ST to create their tracks. [37] Synthesis[ edit ] The Roland TR-808 Rhythm Composer , produced 1980–1984, had a bass drum sound which became very important in drum and bass. Of equal importance is the TR-808 kick drum, an artificially down-pitched or elongated bass drum sound sampled from Roland 's classic TR-808 drum machine, and a sound which has been subject to an enormous amount of experimentation over the years. [38] Rhythm composition[ edit ] Many drum and bass tracks have featured more than one sampled breakbeat in them and a technique of switching between two breaks after each bar developed. A more recent commonly used break is the "Tramen", which combines the Amen break , a James Brown funk breakbeat (" Tighten Up " or "Samurai" break) and an Alex Reece drum and bass breakbeat. [39] The relatively fast drum beat forms a canvas on which a producer can create tracks to appeal to almost any taste and often will form only a background to the other elements of the music. Syncopated breakbeats remain the most distinctive element as without these a high-tempo 4/4 dance track could be classified as techno or gabber . [40] The complex syncopation of the drum tracks' breakbeat is another facet of production on which producers can spend a very large amount of time. The Amen break is generally acknowledged to have been the most-used (and often considered the most powerful) break in drum and bass. [8] Bass elements[ edit ] The genre places great importance on the bassline , in this case a deep sub-bass musical pattern which can be felt physically through powerful sound systems due to the low-range frequencies favoured. There has been considerable exploration of different timbres in the bass line region, particularly within techstep . The bass lines most notably originate from sampled sources or synthesizers . Bass lines performed with a bass instrument, whether it is electric, acoustic or a double bass , are less common. Atmospheric elements[ edit ] Atmospheric pads and samples may be added over the fundamental drum and bass to provide different feels. These have included "light" elements such as ambient pads as found in ambient electronica and samples of jazz and world musics, or "dark" elements such as dissonant pads and sci-fi samples to induce anxiety in the dancer. Vocal and melodic elements[ edit ] Old-school DnB usually included an MC providing vocals. Some styles (such as jazz-influenced DnB) also include melodic instruments soloing over the music. Tempo[ edit ] Drum and bass is usually between 160 and 180 BPM, in contrast to other breakbeat -based dance styles such as nu skool breaks , which maintain a slower pace at around 130–140 BPM. A general upward trend in tempo has been observed during the evolution of drum and bass. The earliest forms of drum and bass clocked in at around 130 bpm in 1990/1991, speeding up to around 155–165 BPM by 1993. Since around 1996, drum and bass tempos have predominantly stayed in the 170–180 range. Recently, some producers have started to once again produce tracks with slower tempos (that is, in the 150-170 bpm range), but the mid-170s tempo is still a hallmark of the drum and bass sound. [30] [41] A track combining the same elements (broken beat, bass, production techniques) as a drum and bass track, but with a slower tempo (say 140 BPM), might not be drum and bass, but  instead may qualify as a drum and bass-influenced breakbeat track. [42] Drop[ edit ] Many mixing points begin or end with a " drop ". The drop is the point in a track where a switch of rhythm or bassline occurs and usually follows a recognisable build section and breakdown . Sometimes, the drop is used to switch between tracks, layering components of different tracks, as the two records may be simply ambient breakdowns at this point. Some DJs prefer to combine breakbeats, a more difficult exercise. Some drops are so popular that the DJ will "rewind" or "reload" or "lift up" the record by spinning it back and restarting it at the build. The drop is often a key point from the point of view of the dance floor, since the drum breaks often fade out to leave an ambient intro playing. When the beats re-commence they are often more complex and accompanied by a heavier bassline, encouraging the crowd to begin dancing. Live performance[ edit ] Pendulum performing live in 2010 Drum and bass exhibits a full frequency response which can sometimes only be fully appreciated on sound systems which can handle very low frequencies, including sub-bass frequencies that are often felt more than heard. As befits its name, the bass element of the music is particularly pronounced, with the comparatively sparse arrangements of drum and bass tracks allowing room for basslines that are deeper than most other forms of dance music. Drum and bass tracks are meticulously designed to create a hard-hitting emotional impact, with the drums complementing the bass to deliver a pulsating, powerful experience. Consequently, drum and bass parties are often advertised as featuring uncommonly loud and bass-heavy sound systems. There are however many albums specifically designed for personal listening. The DJ mix is a particularly popular form of release, with a popular DJ or producer mixing live, or on a computer, a variety of tracks for personal listening. Additionally, there are many albums containing unmixed tracks, suited for home or car listening. [43] DJ performance[ edit ] Although this practice has declined in popularity, [44] DJs are often accompanied by one or more MCs , drawing on the genre's roots in hip hop and reggae / ragga . [45] MCs do not generally receive the same level of recognition as producer/DJs, and some events are specifically marketed as being MC-free. There are relatively few well-known drum and bass MCs, mainly based in London and Bristol, including Stevie Hyper D (deceased), the Ragga Twins , Dynamite MC , Skibadee (deceased) and MC Tali . [46] Live instrument performance[ edit ] Aphrodite in 2009 at Pirate Station , the world's largest drum and bass festival at that time, in Moscow Many musicians have adapted drum and bass to live performances, which feature instruments such as drums (acoustic or electronic), samplers , synthesizers , turntables , bass (either upright or electric) and guitars (acoustic or electric). Samplers have also been used live by assigning samples to a specific drum pad or key on drum pads or synthesizers. MCs are frequently featured in live performances. Subgenres[ edit ] Congo Natty, a ragga jungle artist Smaller scenes within the drum and bass community have developed and the scene as a whole has become much more fractured into specific subgenres, which have been grouped [47] into "light" (influenced by ambient , jazz , and world music ) and "heavy" (influenced by industrial music , sci-fi , and anxiety ) styles, including: Mainstream drum and bass[ edit ] Jump-up , appearing in the mid-1990s, [48] employs heavy and energetic drum and bass, [48] characterised by robotic and heavy bass sounds. It also is generally less serious and contains more humour than other subgenres. [49] [50] Drumstep or halftime is a combination of drum and bass and dubstep, where the beat structure is half time , while the remaining elements still adhere to the usual sub-bass and tempo of drum and bass. [51] [52] [53] Drill 'n' bass (also known as fungle and spunk jazz) consists of very complex and chopped up rhythms, rapid and irregularly syncopated basslines and often ambient elements similar to earlier subgenres of IDM [54] (like ambient techno). The subgenre was developed by names like Squarepusher , Luke Vibert (known as Plug) and Aphex Twin . Light drum and bass[ edit ] Intelligent drum & bass or intelligent jungle is a smoother style, influenced by ambient music , chillout , jazz and soul music . It was pioneered by such artists as Omni Trio , Peshay , Seba , Blu Mar Ten , Deep Blue , Photek , LTJ Bukem [49] and his label Good Looking Records , [55] and the label Moving Shadow . Jazzstep, jazzy jungle, jazz & bass or drum & jazz demonstrates heavy influence by jazz . It uses typical jazz scales, rhythms and instrumentation. [49] Liquid drum and bass (or simply "liquid") draws heavily on harmonic and melodic grooves Sambass , a Brazilian drum and bass style, incorporates elements from samba , bossa nova and other Latin music styles. Pioneered by artists such as DJ Marky . [56] Heavy drum and bass[ edit ] Darkstep is characterised by fast drums and a general dark mood, drawing influences from dark ambient , industrial and hardcore music. Techstep is characterised by sci-fi soundscapes [13] and samples from science fiction culture. Pioneered by artists such as Bad Company UK , Ed Rush , Optical , Dom & Roland , and the label Moving Shadow . [57] [58] Neurofunk or neuro is the progression from techstep [59] incorporating more elements from jazz and funk . Hardstep is a harder style which uses gritty basslines and heavy yet simple electronic melodies. [55] Metal & Bass or Bass Metal is a style which specifically uses Heavy Metal guitar riffs. Pioneered by artists such as Concord Dawn , Counterstrike , Zardonic , Dirtyphonics , Pendulum and others. Genres influenced by drum and bass[ edit ] Born around the same time as jungle, breakcore and digital hardcore share many of the elements of drum and bass and to the uninitiated, tracks from the extreme end of drum and bass may sound identical to breakcore thanks to speed, complexity, impact and maximum sonic density combined with musical experimentation. German drum and bass DJ The Panacea is also one of the leading digital hardcore artists. Raggacore resembles a faster version of the ragga-influenced jungle music of the 1990s, similar to breakcore but with more friendly dancehall beats (dancehall itself being a very important influence on drum and bass). [60] Darkcore , a direct influence on drum and bass, was combined with influences of drum and bass itself leading to the creation of darkstep . There is considerable crossover from the extreme edges of drum and bass, breakcore, darkcore, digital hardcore and raggacore with fluid boundaries. Intelligent dance music (IDM) is a form of art music based on DnB and other electronic dance musics, exploring their boundaries using ideas from science, technology, contemporary classical music and progressive rock, often creating un-danceable, art gallery style music. Ghettotech , a club music genre from Detroit, contains synth and basslines similar to drum and bass. [41] [61] [62] [63] [64]
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Music genre originated in the 1940s For other uses, see Rhythm and blues (disambiguation) . "R&B" and "RnB" redirect here. For the modern style of R&B music, see Contemporary R&B . For the Japanese television station that uses the abbreviation RNB, see Nankai Broadcasting . Rhythm and blues urban contemporary music Rhythm and blues, frequently abbreviated as R&B or R'n'B, is a genre of popular music that originated within African-American communities in the 1940s. The term was originally used by record companies to describe recordings marketed predominantly to African Americans, at a time when "rocking, jazz based music ... [with a] heavy, insistent beat" was becoming more popular. In the commercial rhythm and blues music typical of the 1950s through the 1970s, the bands usually consisted of a piano, one or two guitars, bass, drums, one or more saxophones, and sometimes background vocalists. R&B lyrical themes often encapsulate the African-American history and experience of pain and the quest for freedom and joy, as well as triumphs and failures in terms of societal racism, oppression, relationships, economics, and aspirations. The term "rhythm and blues" has undergone a number of shifts in meaning. In the early 1950s, it was frequently applied to blues records. Starting in the mid-1950s, after this style of music had contributed to the development of rock and roll , the term "R&B" became used in a wider context. It referred to music styles that developed from and incorporated electric blues , as well as gospel and soul music . From 1960s to 70s, some British groups were referred to and promoted as being R&B bands. By the 1970s, the term "rhythm and blues" had changed once again and was used as a blanket term for soul and funk . In the late 1980s, a newer style of R&B developed, becoming known as " contemporary R&B ". It combines rhythm and blues with various elements of pop , soul, funk, disco , hip hop , and electronic music . Etymology, definitions and description[ edit ] Although Jerry Wexler of Billboard magazine is credited with coining the term "rhythm and blues" as a musical term in the United States in 1948, [3] the term had been used in Billboard as early as 1943. [4] [5] However, the company's first list of songs popular among African Americans was named Harlem Hit Parade ; created in 1942, it listed the "most popular records in Harlem " [6] and this replaced the common term " race music ", which originally came from within the black community, but was deemed offensive in the postwar world. [7] [8] The term "rhythm and blues" was then used by Billboard in its chart listings from June 1949 until August 1969, when its "Hot Rhythm & Blues Singles" chart was renamed as "Best Selling Soul Singles". [9] Before the "Rhythm and Blues" name was instated, various record companies had already begun replacing the term "race music" with the term "sepia series". [10] "Rhythm and blues" is often abbreviated as "R&B" or "R'n'B". [11] In the early 1950s, the term "rhythm & blues" was frequently applied to blues records. [12] Writer and producer Robert Palmer defined rhythm & blues as "a catchall term referring to any music that was made by and for black Americans". [13] He has also used the term "R&B" as a synonym for jump blues . [14] However, AllMusic separates it from jump blues because of R&B's stronger gospel influences. [15] Lawrence Cohn , author of Nothing but the Blues, writes that "rhythm and blues" was an umbrella term invented for industry convenience. According to him, the term embraced all black music except classical music and religious music , unless a gospel song sold enough to break into the charts. [7] Well into the 21st century, the term R&B continues in use (in some contexts) to categorize music made by black musicians, as distinct from styles of music made by other musicians. In the commercial rhythm and blues music typical of the 1950s through the 1970s, the bands usually consisted of piano, one or two guitars, bass, drums, and saxophone. Arrangements were rehearsed to the point of effortlessness and were sometimes accompanied by background vocalists. Simple repetitive parts mesh, creating momentum and rhythmic interplay producing mellow, lilting, and often hypnotic textures while calling attention to no individual sound. While singers are emotionally engaged with the lyrics, often intensely so, they remain cool, relaxed, and in control. The bands dressed in suits, and even uniforms, a practice associated with the modern popular music that rhythm and blues performers aspired to dominate. Lyrics often seemed fatalistic, and the music typically followed predictable patterns of chords and structure. [16] R&B lyrical themes often encapsulate the African-American experience of pain and the quest for freedom and joy, [17] [ page needed ] as well as triumphs and failures in terms of relationships, economics, and aspirations.[ citation needed ] One publication of the Smithsonian Institution provided this summary of the origins of the genre in 2016. "A distinctly African American music drawing from the deep tributaries of African American expressive culture, it is an amalgam of jump blues, big band swing, gospel, boogie, and blues that was initially developed during a thirty-year period that bridges the era of legally sanctioned racial segregation, international conflicts, and the struggle for civil rights". [2] The Rock & Roll Hall of Fame defines some of the originators of R&B, including Joe Turner 's big band, Louis Jordan's Tympany Five, James Brown and LaVern Baker. In fact, this source states that "Louis Jordan joined Turner in laying the foundation for R&B in the 1940s, cutting one swinging rhythm & blues masterpiece after another". Other artists who were "cornerstones of R&B and its transformation into rock & roll" include Etta James, Fats Domino , Roy Brown, Little Richard and Ruth Brown. The "doo wop" groups were also noteworthy, including the Orioles , the Ravens and the Dominoes . [18] The term "rock and roll" had a strong sexual connotation in jump blues and R&B, but when DJ Alan Freed referred to rock and roll on mainstream radio in the mid-1950s, "the sexual component had been dialed down enough that it simply became an acceptable term for dancing". [19] Precursors[ edit ] Louis Jordan in New York City, c. July 1946 The great migration of Black Americans to the urban industrial centers of Chicago, Detroit, New York City, Los Angeles and elsewhere in the 1920s and 1930s created a new market for jazz, blues, and related genres of music. These genres of music were often performed by full-time musicians, either working alone or in small groups. The precursors of rhythm and blues came from jazz and blues, which overlapped in the late-1920s and 30s through the work of musicians such as the Harlem Hamfats , with their 1936 hit "Oh Red", as well as Lonnie Johnson , Leroy Carr , Cab Calloway , Count Basie , and T-Bone Walker . There was also increasing emphasis on the electric guitar as a lead instrument, as well as the piano and saxophone . [20] Late 1940s[ edit ] R&B originated in African-American communities in the 1940s. [21] In 1948, RCA Victor was marketing black music under the name "Blues and Rhythm". In that year, Louis Jordan dominated the top five listings of the R&B charts with three songs, and two of the top five songs were based on the boogie-woogie rhythms that had come to prominence during the 1940s. [22] Jordan's band, the Tympany Five (formed in 1938), consisted of him on saxophone and vocals, along with musicians on trumpet, tenor saxophone, piano, bass and drums. [23] [24] Lawrence Cohn described the music as "grittier than his boogie-era jazz-tinged blues". [7] : 173 Robert Palmer described it as "urbane, rocking, jazz-based music ... [with a] heavy, insistent beat". [25] Jordan's music, along with that of Big Joe Turner , Roy Brown , Billy Wright , and Wynonie Harris , is now also referred to as jump blues . Already Paul Gayten , Roy Brown, and others had had hits in the style now referred to as rhythm and blues. In 1948, Wynonie Harris's remake of Brown's 1947 recording " Good Rockin' Tonight " reached number two on the charts, following band leader Sonny Thompson 's "Long Gone" at number one. [26] [27] In 1949, the term "Rhythm and Blues" (R&B) replaced the Billboard category Harlem Hit Parade. [7] Also in that year, " The Huckle-Buck ", recorded by band leader and saxophonist Paul Williams , was the number one R&B tune, remaining on top of the charts for nearly the entire year. Written by musician and arranger Andy Gibson , the song was described as a "dirty boogie" because it was risque and raunchy. [28] Paul Williams and His Hucklebuckers' concerts were sweaty riotous affairs that got shut down on more than one occasion. Their lyrics, by Roy Alfred (who later co-wrote the 1955 hit " (The) Rock and Roll Waltz "), were mildly sexually suggestive, and one teenager from Philadelphia said "That Hucklebuck was a very nasty dance". [29] [30] Also in 1949, a new version of a 1920s blues song, " Ain't Nobody's Business " was a number four hit for Jimmy Witherspoon , and Louis Jordan and the Tympany Five once again made the top five with " Saturday Night Fish Fry ". [31] Many of these hit records were issued on new independent record labels, such as Savoy (founded 1942), King (founded 1943), Imperial (founded 1945), Specialty (founded 1946), Chess (founded 1947), and Atlantic (founded 1948). [20] Afro-Cuban rhythmic influence[ edit ] African American music began incorporating Afro-Cuban rhythmic motifs in the 1800s with the popularity of the Cuban contradanza (known outside of Cuba as the habanera ). [32] The habanera rhythm can be thought of as a combination of tresillo and the backbeat . The habanera rhythm shown as tresillo (lower notes) with the backbeat (upper note). For the more than a quarter-century in which the cakewalk , ragtime and proto-jazz were forming and developing, the Cuban genre habanera exerted a constant presence in African American popular music. [33] Jazz pioneer Jelly Roll Morton considered the tresillo/habanera rhythm (which he called the Spanish tinge ) to be an essential ingredient of jazz. [34] There are examples of tresillo-like rhythms in some African American folk music such as the hand-clapping and foot-stomping patterns in ring shout , post-Civil War drum and fife music, and New Orleans second line music. [35] Wynton Marsalis considers tresillo to be the New Orleans "clave" (although technically, the pattern is only half a clave ). [36] Tresillo is the most basic duple-pulse rhythmic cell in Sub-Saharan African music traditions , and its use in African American music is one of the clearest examples of African rhythmic retention in the United States. [37] The use of tresillo was continuously reinforced by the consecutive waves of Cuban music, which were adopted into North American popular culture. In 1940 Bob Zurke released "Rhumboogie", a boogie-woogie with a tresillo bass line, and lyrics proudly declaring the adoption of Cuban rhythm: Harlem's got a new rhythm, man it's burning up the dance floors because it's so hot! They took a little rhumba rhythm and added boogie-woogie and now look what they got! Rhumboogie, it's Harlem's new creation with the Cuban syncopation, it's the killer! Just plant your both feet on each side. Let both your hips and shoulder glide. Then throw your body back and ride. There's nothing like rhumbaoogie, rhumboogie, boogie-woogie. In Harlem or Havana, you can kiss the old Savannah. It's a killer! [38] Although originating in the metropolis at the mouth of the Mississippi River, New Orleans blues, with its Afro-Caribbean rhythmic traits, is distinct from the sound of the Mississippi Delta blues. [39] In the late 1940s, New Orleans musicians were especially receptive to Cuban influences precisely at the time when R&B was first forming. [40] The first use of tresillo in R&B occurred in New Orleans. Robert Palmer recalls: Fats Domino in 1956 New Orleans producer-bandleader Dave Bartholomew first employed this figure (as a saxophone-section riff) on his own 1949 disc "Country Boy" and subsequently helped make it the most over-used rhythmic pattern in 1950s rock 'n' roll. On numerous recordings by Fats Domino , Little Richard and others, Bartholomew assigned this repeating three-note pattern not just to the string bass, but also to electric guitars and even baritone sax, making for a very heavy bottom. He recalls first hearing the figure – as a bass pattern on a Cuban disc. [41] In a 1988 interview with Palmer, Bartholomew (who had the first R&B studio band), [42] revealed how he initially superimposed tresillo over swing rhythm: I heard the bass playing that part on a 'rumba' record. On 'Country Boy' I had my bass and drums playing a straight swing rhythm and wrote out that 'rumba' bass part for the saxes to play on top of the swing rhythm. Later, especially after rock 'n' roll came along, I made the 'rumba' bass part heavier and heavier. I'd have the string bass, an electric guitar and a baritone all in unison. [43] Bartholomew referred to the Cuban son by the misnomer rumba, a common practice of that time. Fats Domino's " Blue Monday ", produced by Bartholomew, is another example of this now classic use of tresillo in R&B. Bartholomew's 1949 tresillo-based "Oh Cubanas" is an attempt to blend African American and Afro-Cuban music. The word mambo, larger than any of the other text, is placed prominently on the record label. In his composition "Misery", New Orleans pianist Professor Longhair plays a habanera-like figure in his left hand. [44] The deft use of triplets is a characteristic of Longhair's style. Audio playback is not supported in your browser. You can download the audio file . Gerhard Kubik notes that with the exception of New Orleans, early blues lacked complex polyrhythms, and there was a "very specific absence of asymmetric time-line patterns ( key patterns ) in virtually all early-twentieth-century African American music ... only in some New Orleans genres does a hint of simple time line patterns occasionally appear in the form of transient so-called 'stomp' patterns or stop-time chorus. These do not function in the same way as African timelines." [45] In the late 1940s, this changed somewhat when the two-celled timeline structure was brought into the blues. New Orleans musicians such as Bartholomew and Longhair incorporated Cuban instruments, as well as the clave pattern and related two-celled figures in songs such as "Carnival Day", (Bartholomew 1949) and "Mardi Gras In New Orleans" (Longhair 1949). While some of these early experiments were awkward fusions, the Afro-Cuban elements were eventually integrated fully into the New Orleans sound. Robert Palmer reports that, in the 1940s, Professor Longhair listened to and played with musicians from the islands and "fell under the spell of Perez Prado's mambo records." [46] He was especially enamored with Afro-Cuban music. Michael Campbell states: "Professor Longhair's influence was ... far-reaching. In several of his early recordings, Professor Longhair blended Afro-Cuban rhythms with rhythm and blues. The most explicit is 'Longhair's Blues Rhumba,' where he overlays a straightforward blues with a clave rhythm." [47] Longhair's particular style was known locally as rumba-boogie. [48] In his "Mardi Gras in New Orleans", the pianist employs the 2–3 clave onbeat/offbeat motif in a rumba boogie " guajeo ". [49] Piano excerpt from the rumba boogie "Mardi Gras in New Orleans" (1949) by Professor Longhair. 2–3 claves are written above for rhythmic reference. The syncopated, but straight subdivision feel of Cuban music (as opposed to swung subdivisions) took root in New Orleans R&B during this time. Alexander Stewart states that the popular feel was passed along from "New Orleans—through James Brown's music, to the popular music of the 1970s," adding: "The singular style of rhythm & blues that emerged from New Orleans in the years after World War II played an important role in the development of funk. In a related development, the underlying rhythms of American popular music underwent a basic, yet generally unacknowledged transition from a triplet or shuffle feel to even or straight eighth notes. [50] Concerning the various funk motifs, Stewart states that this model "... is different from a time line (such as clave and tresillo) in that it is not an exact pattern, but more of a loose organizing principle." [51] Johnny Otis released the R&B mambo "Mambo Boogie" in January 1951, featuring congas, maracas, claves, and mambo saxophone guajeos in a blues progression. [52] Ike Turner recorded "Cubano Jump" (1954) an electric guitar instrumental, which is built around several 2–3 clave figures, adopted from the mambo. The Hawketts , in " Mardi Gras Mambo " (1955) (featuring the vocals of a young Art Neville), make a clear reference to Perez Prado in their use of his trademark "Unhh!" in the break after the introduction. [53] Ned Sublette states: "The electric blues cats were very well aware of Latin music, and there was definitely such a thing as rhumba blues; you can hear Muddy Waters and Howlin' Wolf playing it." [54] He also cites Otis Rush , Ike Turner and Ray Charles , as R&B artists who employed this feel. [54] The use of clave in R&B coincided with the growing dominance of the backbeat , and the rising popularity of Cuban music in the U.S. In a sense, clave can be distilled down to tresillo (three-side) answered by the backbeat (two-side). [55] 3–2 clave written in two measures in cut-time Tresillo answered by the backbeat, the essence of clave in African American music The " Bo Diddley beat " (1955) is perhaps the first true fusion of 3–2 clave and R&B/rock 'n' roll. Bo Diddley has given different accounts of the riff's origins. Sublette asserts: "In the context of the time, and especially those maracas [heard on the record], 'Bo Diddley' has to be understood as a Latin-tinged record. A rejected cut recorded at the same session was titled only 'Rhumba' on the track sheets." [54] Johnny Otis 's "Willie and the Hand Jive" (1958) is another example of this successful blend of 3–2 claves and R&B. Otis used the Cuban instruments claves and maracas on the song. Bo Diddley 's " Bo Diddley beat " is a clave-based motif. Afro-Cuban music was the conduit by which African American music was "re-Africanized", through the adoption of two-celled figures like clave and Afro-Cuban instruments like the conga drum , bongos , maracas and claves . According to John Storm Roberts , R&B became the vehicle for the return of Cuban elements into mass popular music. [56] Ahmet Ertegun , producer for Atlantic Records , is reported to have said that "Afro-Cuban rhythms added color and excitement to the basic drive of R&B." [57] As Ned Sublette points out though: "By the 1960s, with Cuba the object of a United States embargo that still remains in effect today, the island nation had been forgotten as a source of music. By the time people began to talk about rock and roll as having a history, Cuban music had vanished from North American consciousness." [58] Early to mid-1950s[ edit ] Little Richard in 1967 At first, only African Americans were buying R&B discs. According to Jerry Wexler of Atlantic Records, sales were localized in African-American markets; there were no white sales or white radio play. During the early 1950s, more white teenagers started to become aware of R&B and began purchasing the music. For example, 40% of 1952 sales at Dolphin's of Hollywood record shop, located in an African-American area of Los Angeles, were to whites. Eventually, white teens across the country turned their musical taste toward rhythm and blues. [59] Johnny Otis , who had signed with the Newark, New Jersey-based Savoy Records, produced many R&B hits in 1951, including " Double Crossing Blues ", "Mistrustin' Blues" and " Cupid's Boogie ", all of which hit number one that year. Otis scored ten top ten hits that year. Other hits include " Gee Baby ", "Mambo Boogie" and "All Nite Long". [60] The Clovers , a quintet consisting of a vocal quartet with accompanying guitarist, sang a distinctive-sounding combination of blues and gospel, [61] had the number five hit of the year with " Don't You Know I Love You " on Atlantic. [60] [62] [63] Also in July 1951, Cleveland, Ohio DJ Alan Freed started a late-night radio show called "The Moondog Rock Roll House Party" on WJW (850 AM). [64] [65] Freed's show was sponsored by Fred Mintz, whose R&B record store had a primarily African American clientele. Freed began referring to the rhythm and blues music he played as "rock and roll". In 1951 Little Richard Penniman began recording for RCA Records in the jump blues style of late 1940s stars Roy Brown and Billy Wright . However, it was not until he recorded a demo in 1954 that caught the attention of Specialty Records that the world would start to hear his new uptempo funky rhythm and blues that would catapult him to fame in 1955 and help define the sound of rock 'n' roll. A rapid succession of rhythm and blues hits followed, beginning with " Tutti Frutti " [66] and " Long Tall Sally ", which would influence performers such as James Brown , [67] Elvis Presley , [68] and Otis Redding . [67] Also in 1951, the song Rocket 88 was recorded by Ike Turner and his Kings of Rhythm at a studio owned by Sam Phillips with the vocal by Jackie Brenston . This song is often cited as a precursor to rock and roll or as one of the first records in that genre. [69] In a later interview, however, Ike Turner offered this comment: "I don't think that 'Rocket 88' is rock 'n' roll. I think that 'Rocket 88' is R&B, but I think 'Rocket 88' is the cause of rock and roll existing". [70] Ruth Brown was known as the "Queen of R&B". [71] Ruth Brown , performing on the Atlantic label, placed hits in the top five every year from 1951 through 1954: " Teardrops from My Eyes ", "Five, Ten, Fifteen Hours", " (Mama) He Treats Your Daughter Mean " and " What a Dream ". [61] Faye Adams 's " Shake a Hand " made it to number two in 1952. In 1953, the R&B record-buying public made Willie Mae Thornton 's original recording of Leiber and Stoller 's " Hound Dog " [72] the year's number three hit. Ruth Brown was very prominent among female R&B stars; her popularity most likely came from "her deeply rooted vocal delivery in African American tradition" [73] [74] That same year The Orioles , a doo-wop group, had the number four hit of the year with " Crying in the Chapel ". [75] Fats Domino made the top 30 of the pop charts in 1952 and 1953, then the top 10 with " Ain't That a Shame ". [76] [77] Ray Charles came to national prominence in 1955 with " I Got a Woman ". [78] Big Bill Broonzy said of Charles's music: "He's mixing the blues with the spirituals ... I know that's wrong." [7] : 173 In 1954 the Chords ' " Sh-Boom " [79] became the first hit to cross over from the R&B chart to hit the top 10 early in the year. Late in the year, and into 1955, " Hearts of Stone " by the Charms made the top 20. [80] At Chess Records in the spring of 1955, Bo Diddley 's debut record " Bo Diddley "/" I'm a Man " climbed to number two on the R&B charts and popularized Bo Diddley's own original rhythm and blues clave-based vamp that would become a mainstay in rock and roll. [81] At the urging of Leonard Chess at Chess Records, Chuck Berry reworked a country fiddle tune with a long history, entitled " Ida Red ". [82] The resulting " Maybellene " was not only a number three hit on the R&B charts in 1955, but also reached into the top 30 on the pop charts. Alan Freed , who had moved to the much larger market of New York City in 1954, helped the record become popular with white teenagers. Freed had been given part of the writing credit by Chess in return for his promotional activities, a common practice at the time. [83] R&B was also a strong influence on rock and roll . [84] A 1985 article in The Wall Street Journal , titled, "Rock! It's Still Rhythm and Blues"[ full citation needed ] reported that the "two terms were used interchangeably" until about 1957. The other sources quoted in the article said that rock and roll combined R&B with pop and country music. [85] Fats Domino was not convinced that there was any new genre. In 1957, he said, "What they call rock 'n' roll now is rhythm and blues. I've been playing it for 15 years in New Orleans". [86] According to Rolling Stone , "this is a valid statement ... all Fifties rockers, black and white, country born and city bred, were fundamentally influenced by R&B, the black popular music of the late Forties and early Fifties". [87] Della Reese In 1956, an R&B "Top Stars of '56" tour took place, with headliners Al Hibbler , Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers, and Carl Perkins , whose " Blue Suede Shoes " was very popular with R&B music buyers. [88] Some of the performers completing the bill were Chuck Berry, Cathy Carr , Shirley & Lee , Della Reese , Sam "T-Bird" Jensen, the Cleftones , and the Spaniels with Illinois Jacquet 's Big Rockin' Rhythm Band. [89] Cities visited by the tour included Columbia, South Carolina; Annapolis, Maryland; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Syracuse, Rochester and Buffalo, New York; and other cities.[ citation needed ] In Columbia, the concert ended with a near riot as Perkins began his first song as the closing act. Perkins is quoted as saying, "It was dangerous. Lot of kids got hurt". In Annapolis, 50,000 to 70,000 people tried to attend a sold-out performance with 8,000 seats. Roads were clogged for seven hours. [90] Filmmakers took advantage of the popularity of "rhythm and blues" musicians as "rock n roll" musicians beginning in 1956. Little Richard, Chuck Berry, Fats Domino, Big Joe Turner, the Treniers , the Platters , and the Flamingos all made it onto the big screen. [91] Two Elvis Presley records made the R&B top five in 1957: " Jailhouse Rock "/" Treat Me Nice " at number one, and " All Shook Up " at number five, an unprecedented acceptance of a non-African American artist into a music category known for being created by blacks. [92] Nat King Cole , also a jazz pianist who had two hits on the pop charts in the early 1950s (" Mona Lisa " at number two in 1950 and " Too Young " at number one in 1951), had a record in the top five in the R&B charts in 1958, " Looking Back "/"Do I Like It". [93] In 1959, two black-owned record labels, one of which would become hugely successful, made their debut: Sam Cooke 's Sar and Berry Gordy 's Motown Records . [94] Brook Benton was at the top of the R&B charts in 1959 and 1960 with one number one and two number two hits. [95] Benton had a certain warmth in his voice that attracted a wide variety of listeners, and his ballads led to comparisons with performers such as Nat King Cole , Frank Sinatra and Tony Bennett . [96] Lloyd Price , who in 1952 had a number one hit with " Lawdy Miss Clawdy ", regained predominance with a version of " Stagger Lee " at number one and " Personality " at number five in 1959. [97] [98] The white bandleader of the Bill Black Combo, Bill Black , who had helped start Elvis Presley's career and was Elvis's bassist in the 1950s, was popular with black listeners.[ citation needed ] Ninety percent of his record sales were from black people, and his " Smokie, Part 2 " (1959) rose to the number one position on black music charts.[ citation needed ] He was once told that "a lot of those stations still think you're a black group because the sound feels funky and black."[ citation needed ] Hi Records did not feature pictures of the Combo on early records. [99] Sam Cooke Sam Cooke 's number five hit " Chain Gang " is indicative of R&B in 1960, as is pop rocker Chubby Checker 's number five hit " The Twist ". [98] [100] By the early 1960s, the music industry category previously known as rhythm and blues was being called soul music , and similar music by white artists was labeled blue-eyed soul . [101] [94] Motown Records had its first million-selling single in 1960 with the Miracles ' " Shop Around ", [102] and in 1961, Stax Records had its first hit with Carla Thomas 's " Gee Whiz (Look at His Eyes) ". [103] [104] Stax's next major hit, The Mar-Keys ' instrumental " Last Night " (also released in 1961), introduced the rawer Memphis soul sound for which Stax became known. [105] In Jamaica, R&B influenced the development of ska . [106] [107] In 1969, black culture and rhythm and blues reached another great achievement when the Grammys added the Rhythm and Blues category, giving academic recognition to the category.[ citation needed ] By the 1970s, the term "rhythm and blues" was being used as a blanket term for soul , funk , and disco . [108] 1980s to present[ edit ] Main article: Contemporary R&B In the late 1980s and early 1990s, hip-hop started to capture the imagination of America's youth. R&B started to become homogenized, with a group of high-profile producers responsible for most R&B hits. It was hard for R&B artists of the era to sell their music or even have their music heard because of the rise of hip-hop, but some adopted a "hip-hop" image, were marketed as such, and often featured rappers on their songs. In 1990, Billboard reintroduced R&B to categorize all of Black popular music other than hip-hop. [109] Newer artists such as Usher , R. Kelly , Janet Jackson , TLC , Aaliyah , Brandy , Destiny's Child , Tevin Campbell and Mary J. Blige enjoyed success. L.A. Reid , the CEO of LaFace Records , was responsible for some of R&B's greatest successes in the 1990s in the form of Usher , TLC and Toni Braxton . Later, Reid successfully marketed Boyz II Men . [110] In 2004, 80% of the songs that topped the R&B charts were also at the top of the Hot 100. That period was the all-time peak for R&B and hip hop on the Billboard Hot 100 and on Top 40 Radio. [111] From about 2005 to 2013, R&B sales declined. [112] However, since 2010, hip-hop has started to take cues from the R&B sound, choosing to adopt a softer, smoother sound that incorporates traditional R&B with rappers such as Drake , who has opened an entire new door for the genre. This sound has gained in popularity and created great controversy for both hip-hop and R&B as to how to identify it. [113] In 2010, the National Rhythm & Blues Hall of Fame was founded by LaMont "ShowBoat" Robinson . [114] Jewish influence in the business end of rhythm and blues[ edit ] Main article: Jewish influence in rhythm and blues According to the Jewish writer, music publishing executive, and songwriter Arnold Shaw , during the 1940s in the US, there was generally little opportunity for Jews in the WASP -controlled realm of mass communications , but the music business was "wide open for Jews as it was for blacks". [115] Jews played a key role in developing and popularizing African American music, including rhythm and blues, and the independent record business was dominated by young Jewish men who promoted the sounds of black music. [116] British rhythm and blues[ edit ] Eric Burdon & the Animals (1964) British rhythm and blues and blues rock developed in the early 1960s, largely as a response to the recordings of American artists, often brought over by African American servicemen stationed in Britain or seamen visiting ports such as London, Liverpool, Newcastle and Belfast. [117] [118] Many bands, particularly in the developing London club scene, tried to emulate black rhythm and blues performers, resulting in a "rawer" or "grittier" sound than the more popular " beat groups ". [119] During the 1960s, Geno Washington , the Foundations , and the Equals gained pop hits. [120] Many British black musicians helped form the British R&B scene. These included Geno Washington , an American singer stationed in England with the Air Force. He was invited to join what became Geno Washington & the Ram Jam Band by guitarist Pete Gage in 1965 and enjoyed top 40 hit singles and two top 10 albums before the band split up in 1969. [121] Another American GI , Jimmy James , born in Jamaica, moved to London after two local number one hits in 1960 with The Vagabonds, who built a strong reputation as a live act. They released a live album and their studio debut, The New Religion, in 1966 and achieved moderate success with a few singles before the original Vagabonds broke up in 1970. [122] White blues rock musician Alexis Korner formed new jazz rock band CCS in 1970. [123] Interest in the blues would influence major British rock musicians, including Eric Clapton , Mick Taylor , Peter Green , and John Mayall , the groups Free and Cream adopted an interest in a wider range of rhythm and blues styles. [119] The Rolling Stones became the second most popular UK band (after the Beatles ) [124] and led the " British Invasion " of the US pop charts. [119] The Rolling Stones covered Bobby Womack & the Valentinos' [125] song " It's All Over Now ", giving them their first UK number one in 1964. [126] Under the influence of blues and R&B, bands such as the Rolling Stones, the Yardbirds , and the Animals, and more jazz-influenced bands like the Graham Bond Organisation and Zoot Money , had blue-eyed soul albums. [119] White R&B musicians popular in the UK included Steve Winwood , Frankie Miller, Scott Walker & the Walker Brothers , the Animals from Newcastle, [127] the Spencer Davis Group , and Van Morrison & Them from Belfast. [119] None of these bands exclusively played rhythm and blues, but it remained at the core of their early albums. [119] Champion Jack Dupree was a New Orleans blues and boogie woogie pianist who toured Europe and settled there from 1960, living in Switzerland and Denmark, then in Halifax, England in the 1970s and 1980s, before finally settling in Germany. [128] From the 1970s to 1980s, Carl Douglas , Hot Chocolate, Delegation, Junior, Central Line, Princess, Jacki Graham, David Grant, the Loose Ends, the Pasadenas and Soul II Soul gained hits on the pop or R&B charts. [129] The music of the British mod subculture grew out of rhythm and blues and later soul performed by artists who were not available to the small London clubs where the scene originated. [130] In the late 1960s, the Who performed American R&B songs such as the Motown hit "Heat Wave", a song which reflected the young mod lifestyle. [130] Many of these bands enjoyed national success in the UK, but found it difficult to break into the American music market. [130] The British white R&B bands produced music which was very different in tone from that of African-American artists. [119]
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Music genre Not to be confused with Reggae or Reggae en Español . Reggaeton Late 1980s in Panama [1] [2] Early 1990s in Puerto Rico [3] [4] Typical instruments The scene in the summer of 1995; unknown duo from Residencial Luis Llorens Torres in San Juan, rapping at a club on the beach in Puerto Nuevo, Vega Baja Reggaeton ( /ˌrɛɡeɪˈtoʊn, ˌreɪɡ-/ ), [7] [8] also known as reggaetón or reguetón, [9] ( Spanish: [reɣeˈton] ) is a modern style of popular and electronic music that originated in Panamá during the late 1980s, and which rose to prominence in the late 1990s and early 2000s through a plethora of Puerto Rican musicians. [10] [11] [12] It has been popularized and dominated by artists from Puerto Rico since the early 1990s. [3] It has evolved from dancehall , with elements of hip hop , Latin American , and Caribbean music . Vocals include toasting / rapping and singing , typically in Spanish. Reggaetón, today, is regarded as one of the most popular music genres, worldwide; it is the top music genre among the Spanish-speaking Caribbean nations and one of the primary modern genres within the Spanish-language music industry. Seemingly endless artists have risen to fame, not only from the Caribbean ( Puerto Rico , Panamá , Dominican Republic , Cuba ), but particularly from Colombia ( Feid , J Balvin , Karol G , Maluma , Manuel Turizo , etc.) as of around 2010. Argentina has seen a modern surge in young artists inspired by the reggaetón style, fusing their music with Spanish rap verses, trapetón and R&B-style vocals (such as the “Los Del Espacio”, including LIT killah , Tiago PZK , Duki , Emilia , and María Becerra , as well as Argentine pop star Tini ). Several established, world-famous performers—notably Puerto Rican-American Jennifer Lopez and Shakira from Colombia—have embraced the style, recording numerous duets and collaborations with top reggaetoneros. Several other emerging international artists are seeing success in the genre as well, including Catalán - Spanish singer Bad Gyal (from Barcelona ) and trilingual Brazilian star Anitta (from Rio de Janeiro ). Mexican-American singer Becky G (from Los Angeles, California ) has experienced huge success in recent years, as a Latino American artist in the reggaetón genre. [13] In 2004, Daddy Yankee released his smash single “ Gasolina ”, regarded by many as the first globally-successful reggaetón song; Daddy Yankee is credited with bringing the style to western pop music listeners. By the 2010s, the genre had seen increased popularity across Latin America , as well as modern acceptance within mainstream Western music ; during the 2010s, several new award categories (focusing on reggaetón and Latin music) were unveiled at various American music awards shows, notably the English-language American Music Awards , Billboard Music Awards , Grammy Awards , and MTV Video Music Awards . [14] Etymology The word reggaeton (formed from the word reggae plus the augmentative suffix -tón) was first used in 1988 when El General 's representative Michael Ellis gave it that name to describe it as "reggae grande" (big reggae). [1] The spellings reggaeton and reggaetón are common, although prescriptivist sources such as the Fundéu BBVA and the Academia Puertorriqueña de la Lengua Española recommend the spelling reguetón, as it conforms more closely with traditional Spanish spelling rules . [9] [15] History Don Omar (left) and Daddy Yankee (right) are both referred to as the " King of Reggaeton ". [16] [17] 1980s-2000s: Emergence Often mistaken for Reggae or reggae en Español, reggaeton is a younger genre that originated in the late 1980s in Panama and was later popularized in Puerto Rico. [11] [18] [7] [19] [20] It had its origins in what was known as rap y reggae "underground" music, due to its circulation through informal networks and performances at unofficial venues. DJ Playero and DJ Nelson were inspired by hip hop and dancehall to produce " riddims ", the first reggaeton tracks. As Caribbean and African-American music gained momentum in Puerto Rico, reggae rap in Spanish marked the beginning of the Boricua underground and was a creative outlet for many young people. This created an inconspicuous-yet-prominent underground youth culture which sought to express itself. As a youth culture existing on the fringes of society and the law, it has often been criticized. The Puerto Rican police launched a campaign against underground music by confiscating cassette tapes from music stores under penal obscenity codes, levying fines and demonizing rappers in the media. [21] Bootleg recordings and word of mouth became the primary means of distribution for this music until 1998, when it coalesced into modern reggaeton. The genre's popularity increased when it was discovered by international audiences during the early 2000s. [22] Cassettes were made in carports (marquesinas) and then sold on the street, out of the trunk of a car. The new genre, simply called "underground" and later "perreo", had explicit lyrics about drugs, violence, poverty, friendship, love and sex. These themes, depicting the troubles of inner-city life, can still be found in reggaeton. "Underground" music was recorded in marquesinas (or carports ) [23] and at public housing complexes such as Villa Kennedy, and Jurutungo, [24] [21] often by creators using second-hand recording equipment. [23] Despite that, the quality of the cassettes was good enough to help increase their popularity among Puerto Rican youth. The cassettes were sold or distributed on the streets from the trunks of cars. [23] [21] The availability and quality of the cassettes led to reggaeton's popularity, which crossed socioeconomic barriers in the Puerto Rican music scene. The most popular cassettes in the early 1990s were DJ Negro's The Noise I and II and DJ Playero's 37 and 38. Gerardo Cruet, who created the recordings, spread the genre from the marginalized residential areas into other sectors of society, particularly private schools. By the mid-1990s, "underground" cassettes were being sold in music stores. The genre caught on with middle-class youth, then found its way into the media. By this time, Puerto Rico had several clubs dedicated to the underground scene; Club Rappers in Carolina and PlayMakers in Puerto Nuevo were the most notable. Bobby "Digital" Dixon 's " Dem Bow " production was played in clubs. Underground music was not originally intended to be club music. In South Florida, DJ Laz and Hugo Diaz of the Diaz Brothers were popularizing the genre from Palm Beach to Miami. Underground music in Puerto Rico was harshly criticized. In February 1995, there was a government-sponsored campaign against underground music and its cultural influence. Puerto Rican police raided six record stores in San Juan, [25] hundreds of cassettes were confiscated and fines imposed in accordance with Laws 112 and 117 against obscenity. [21] The Department of Education banned baggy clothing and underground music from schools. [26] For months after the raids local media demonized rappers, calling them "irresponsible corrupters of the public order." [21] In 1995, DJ Negro released The Noise 3 with a mockup label reading, "Non-explicit lyrics". The album had no cursing until the last song. It was a hit, and underground music continued to seep into the mainstream. Senator Velda González of the Popular Democratic Party and the media continued to view the movement as a social nuisance. [27] During the mid-1990s, the Puerto Rican police and National Guard confiscated reggaeton tapes and CDs to get "obscene" lyrics out of the hands of consumers. [28] Schools banned hip hop clothing and music to quell reggaeton's influence. In 2002, Senator González led public hearings to regulate the sexual "slackness" of reggaeton lyrics. Although the effort did not seem to negatively affect public opinion about reggaeton, it reflected the unease of the government and the upper social classes with what the music represented. Because of its often sexually-charged content and its roots in poor, urban communities, many middle- and upper-class Puerto Ricans found reggaeton threatening, "immoral, as well as artistically deficient, a threat to the social order, apolitical". [26] Despite the controversy, reggaeton slowly gained acceptance as part of Puerto Rican culture — helped, in part, by politicians including González who began to use reggaeton in election campaigns to appeal to younger voters in 2003. [26] Puerto Rican mainstream acceptance of reggaeton has grown and the genre has become part of popular culture, including a 2006 Pepsi commercial with Daddy Yankee [29] and PepsiCo's choice of Ivy Queen as musical spokesperson for Mountain Dew. [30] [ unreliable source? ] Other examples of greater acceptance in Puerto Rico are religiously- and educationally-influenced lyrics; Reggae School is a rap album produced to teach math skills to children, similar to School House Rock . [31] Reggaeton expanded when other producers, such as DJ Nelson and DJ Eric, followed DJ Playero . During the 1990s, Ivy Queen 's 1996 album En Mi Imperio , DJ Playero 's Playero 37 (introducing Daddy Yankee) and The Noise: Underground, The Noise 5 and The Noise 6 were popular in Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic . Don Chezina , Tempo , Eddie Dee , Baby Rasta & Gringo and Lito & Polaco were also popular. The name "reggaeton" became prominent during the early 2000s, characterized by the dembow beat. It was coined in Puerto Rico to describe a unique fusion of Puerto Rican music. [22] Reggaeton is currently popular throughout Latin America. It increased in popularity with Latino youth in the United States when DJ Joe and DJ Blass worked with Plan B and Sir Speedy [32] on Reggaeton Sex, Sandunguero and Fatal Fantasy. 2004: Crossover In 2004, reggaeton became popular throughout the United States and Europe. Tego Calderón was receiving airplay in the U.S., and the music was popular among youth. Daddy Yankee's El Cangri.com became popular that year in the country, as did Héctor & Tito . Luny Tunes and Noriega 's Mas Flow , Yaga & Mackie 's Sonando Diferente , Tego Calderón's El Abayarde , Ivy Queen's Diva , Zion & Lennox 's Motivando a la Yal and the Desafío compilation were also well received. Rapper N.O.R.E. released a hit single, " Oye Mi Canto ". Daddy Yankee released Barrio Fino and a hit single, " Gasolina ", opening the door for reggaeton globally. [33] Tego Calderón recorded the singles "Pa' Que Retozen" and "Guasa Guasa". Don Omar was popular, particularly in Europe, with " Pobre Diabla " and " Dale Don Dale ". [34] Other popular reggaeton artists include Tony Dize , Angel & Khriz , Nina Sky , Dyland & Lenny , RKM & Ken-Y , Julio Voltio , Calle 13 , Héctor el Father , Wisin & Yandel and Tito El Bambino . In late 2004 and early 2005, inspired by the success of "Gasolina", Shakira collaborated with Alejandro Sanz to record " La Tortura " and "La Tortura – Shaketon Remix" for her album, Fijación Oral Vol. 1 , further popularizing reggaeton. [35] Four reggaeton songs were sung at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards : by Don Omar (" Dile "), Tego Calderón, Daddy Yankee, and Shakira with Sanz – the first time any reggaeton song was performed on that stage. Musicians began to incorporate bachata into reggaeton, [36] with Ivy Queen releasing singles (" Te He Querido, Te He Llorado " and "La Mala") featuring bachata's signature guitar sound, slower, romantic rhythms and emotive singing style. [36] Daddy Yankee's " Lo Que Paso, Paso " and Don Omar's "Dile" are also bachata-influenced. In 2005 producers began to remix existing reggaeton music with bachata, marketing it as bachaton : "bachata, Puerto Rican style". [36] 2006–2017: Topping the charts In May 2006, Don Omar's King of Kings was the highest-ranking reggaeton LP to date on the U.S. charts, debuting atop the Top Latin Albums chart and peaking at number seven on the Billboard 200 chart. Omar's single, "Angelito", topped the Billboard Latin Rhythm Radio Chart. [37] He broke Britney Spears ' in-store-appearance sales record at Downtown Disney's Virgin music store. That same year, Shakira 's " Hips Don't Lie ", featuring Wyclef Jean of the Fugees , became "the most popular song in the genre's history", with "the dembow beat in the background, the trumpet sample of Jerry Rivera's "Amores como el nuestro" in the chorus, the obvious salsa influence." [38] In June 2007, Daddy Yankee's El Cartel III: The Big Boss set a first-week sales record for a reggaeton album, with 88,000 copies sold. [39] It topped the Top Latin Albums and Top Rap Albums charts, the first reggaeton album to do so on the latter. The album peaked at number nine on the Billboard 200, the second-highest reggaeton album on the mainstream chart. [40] Wisin & Yandel The third-highest-ranking reggaeton album was Wisin & Yandel 's Wisin vs. Yandel: Los Extraterrestres , which debuted at number 14 on the Billboard 200 and number one on the Top Latin Albums chart later in 2007. [41] In 2008 Daddy Yankee soundtrack to his film, Talento de Barrio , debuted at number 13 on the Billboard 200 chart. It peaked at number one on the Top Latin Albums chart, number three on Billboard's Top Soundtracks and number six on the Top Rap Albums chart. [40] In 2009, Wisin & Yandel's La Revolución debuted at number seven on the Billboard 200, number one on the Top Latin Albums and number three on the Top Rap Albums charts. By 2008, Reggaeton was the "biggest-selling genre of Latin music" and one of its artists, Tego Calderon, was using it to describe and encourage black pride . [42] Since 2017: "Despacito" effect J Balvin in 2017 In 2017, the music video for " Despacito " by Luis Fonsi featuring Daddy Yankee reached one billion views in less than three months. From January 2018 to November 2020, the music video was the most viewed YouTube video of all-time. With its 3.3 million certified sales plus track-equivalent streams, "Despacito" became one of the best-selling Latin singles in the United States . The success of the song and its remix version led Daddy Yankee to become the most listened-to artist worldwide on the streaming service Spotify on 9 July 2017, being the first Latin artist to do so. [43] [44] [45] He later became the fifth most listened-to male artist and the sixth overall of 2017 on Spotify. [46] In June 2017, "Despacito" was cited by Billboard's Leila Cobo as the song that renewed interest in the Latin music market from recording labels in the United States. [47] Julyssa Lopez of The Washington Post stated that the successes of "Despacito" and J Balvin's " Mi Gente " is "the beginning of a new Latin crossover era." [48] Stephanie Ho of Genius website wrote that "the successes of 'Despacito' and 'Mi Gente' could point to the beginning of a successful wave for Spanish-language music in the US." [49] Ho also stated that "as 'Despacito' proves, fans don't need to understand the language in order to enjoy the music", referring to the worldwide success of the song, including various non-Spanish-speaking countries. [49] "Te Boté" and the minimalist dembow In April 2018, "Te Boté" was released by Nio Garcia, Casper Magico, Darell , Ozuna , Bad Bunny and Nicky Jam . It reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart. It currently has over 1.8 billion views on YouTube. [50] Many artists began to mark strong commercial trends in a market dominated by mixing Latin trap and reggaeton followed by a new minimalist dembow rhythm. For example, songs such as "Adictiva" by Daddy Yankee and Anuel AA, "Asesina" by Brytiago and Darell, "Cuando Te Besé" by Becky G and Paulo Londra, "No Te Veo" by Casper Magico and many other songs have been made in this style. [51] [52] Characteristics Rhythm The dembow riddim was created by Jamaican dancehall producers during the late 1980s and early 1990s. Dembow consists of a kick drum, kickdown drum, palito, snare drum, timbal, timballroll and (sometimes) a high-hat cymbal. Dembow's percussion pattern was influenced by dancehall and other West Indian music ( soca , calypso and cadence ); this gives dembow a pan-Caribbean flavor. Steely & Clevie , creators of the Poco Man Jam riddim, are usually credited with the creation of dembow. [53] At its heart is the 3+3+2 ( tresillo ) rhythm, complemented by a bass drum in 4/4 time. [54]
) Fishbone playing in Los Angeles Ska historian Albino Brown (of the radio program The Ska Parade) coined the term "third-wave ska" (3rd Wave Ska) in 1989 and helped to catalyze such multi-platinum bands as No Doubt and Sublime . Third-wave ska originated in the punk scene in the late 1980s and became commercially successful in the 1990s. Although some third-wave ska has a traditional 1960s sound, most third-wave ska is characterized by dominating guitar riffs and large horn sections. United Kingdom[ edit ] By the late 1980s, ska had experienced a minor resurgence of popularity in the United Kingdom, due to bands such as the Burial and the Hotknives . The 1980s and 1990s also heralded many ska festivals, and a re-emergence of the traditional skinhead subculture . [26] [27] [28] [29] Europe[ edit ] The early 1980s saw a massive surge in ska's popularity in Germany, leading to the founding of many German ska bands like the Busters , record labels and festivals. [27] [30] In Spain, ska became relevant in the 1980s in the Basque Country due to the influence of Basque Radical Rock , with Kortatu and Potato being the most representatives bands.[ according to whom? ] Skalariak and Betagarri followed in the early 1990s and their influence is visible outside the Basque Country in punk-rock bands like Ska-P , Boikot and many others that have gained importance in the Spanish rock and punk rock scene and festivals.[ citation needed ] Australia[ edit ] The Australian ska scene flourished in the mid-1980s, following the musical precedents set by 2 Tone, and spearheaded by bands such as the Porkers . [31] Some of the Australian ska revival bands found success on the national music charts, most notably Allniters , who had a number 10 hit with a ska cover of " Montego Bay " in 1983. [32] The 30 piece Melbourne Ska Orchestra has enjoyed success in recent years, touring internationally, including sets at Glastonbury and Montreux Jazz Festival . [33] Russia and Japan[ edit ] A Russian (then-Soviet) ska scene was established in the mid-1980s in Saint Petersburg as a kind of anglophone opposition to more traditional Russian rock music. AVIA and N.O.M. were among the first bands of genre. Then bands like Spitfire , Distemper , Leningrad and Markscheider Kunst became popular and commercially successful in Russia and abroad in the late 1990s. Japan established its own ska scene, colloquially referred to as J-ska , in the mid-1980s. [34] [35] The Tokyo Ska Paradise Orchestra , formed in 1985, have been one of the most commercially successful progenitors of Japanese ska. [36] The Americas[ edit ] Desorden Publico , which are from Caracas , Venezuela formed in 1985. Latin America's ska scene started developing in the mid-1980s. Latin American ska bands typically play traditional ska rhythms blended with strong influences from Latin music and rock en Español . [37] The most prominent bands include the Grammy nominated Desorden Público from Venezuela [38] and Grammy awarded Los Fabulosos Cadillacs from Argentina, who scored an international hit single with " El Matador " in 1994. [39] The Uptones , which are from Berkeley, California , formed in 1981. By the early 1980s, 2 Tone-influenced ska bands began forming throughout the United States. [25] The Uptones from Berkeley, California and the Toasters from New York City —both formed in 1981 — were among the first active ska bands in North America. They are both credited with laying the groundwork for American ska and establishing scenes in their respective regions. [7] [40] [41] In Los Angeles around the same time, the Untouchables also formed. While many of the early American ska bands continued in the musical traditions set by 2 Tone and the mod revival , bands such as Fishbone , the Mighty Mighty Bosstones and Operation Ivy pioneered the American ska punk subgenre, a fusion of ska and punk rock that typically downplayed ska's R&B influence in favor of faster tempos and guitar distortion . [25] [42] In 1986, No Doubt , a ska punk band was formed. They were one of the more mainstream ska bands that set the stage for many up and coming bands. The Mighty Mighty Bosstones in their typical plaid outfits. Two hotspots for the United States' burgeoning ska scenes were New York City and Orange County , California. In New York, Toasters frontman Robert "Bucket" Hingley formed the independent record label Moon Ska Records in 1983. The label quickly became the largest independent ska label in the United States. [43] The Orange County ska scene was a major breeding ground for ska punk and more contemporary pop-influenced ska music, personified by bands such as Reel Big Fish and Sublime . [44] It was here that the term "third wave ska" was coined and popularized by Albino Brown and Tazy Phyllipz (hosts of the Ska Parade radio show) to describe the new wave of ska-influenced bands which were steadily gaining notoriety;  and Brown wrote the first treatise on ska's third wave in 1994. [45] [46] [47] The San Francisco Bay Area also contributed to ska's growing popularity, with Skankin' Pickle , Let's Go Bowling and the Dance Hall Crashers becoming known on the touring circuit. The Dance Hall Crashers in 1998. The mid-1990s saw a considerable rise in ska music's underground popularity, marked by the formation of many ska-based record labels, booking organizations and indie zines . While Moon Ska was still the largest of the United States' ska labels, other notable labels included Jump Up Records of Chicago , which covered the thriving midwest scene, and Steady Beat Recordings of Los Angeles , which covered Southern California's traditional ska revival. Stomp Records of Montreal was Canada's primary producer and distributor of ska music. [48] Additionally, many punk and indie rock labels, such as Hellcat Records and Fueled by Ramen , broadened their scope to include both ska and ska punk bands. Asian Man Records (formerly Dill Records ), founded in 1996, started out primarily releasing ska punk albums before branching out to other music styles. [49] In 1993, the Mighty Mighty Bosstones signed with Mercury Records , becoming the first American ska punk band to find mainstream commercial success, with their 1994 album Question the Answers achieving gold record status and peaking at number 138 on the Billboard 200 . [50] In 1995, punk band Rancid , featuring former members of Operation Ivy, released the ska punk single " Time Bomb ", which reached number 8 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks , becoming the first major ska punk hit of the 1990s and launching the genre into the public eye. [51] Over the next few years, a string of notable ska and ska-influenced singles became hits on mainstream radio, including " Sell Out " by Reel Big Fish and " The Impression That I Get " by the Mighty Mighty Bosstones, all of whom would reach platinum status with each of their respective albums. By 1996, third wave ska was one of the most popular forms of alternative music in the United States. [51] By the late 1990s, mainstream interest in third wave ska bands waned as other music genres gained momentum. [52] Moon Ska Records folded in 2000, but Moon Ska Europe, a licensed affiliate based in Europe, continued operating in the 2000s and was later relaunched as Moon Ska World . In 2003, Hingley launched a new ska record label, Megalith Records . Post-third wave[ edit ] In the early 21st century, ska was mostly absent from the radio, though there were exceptions. [53] In 2017, Captain SKA reached number 4 on the UK Singles Chart with " Liar Liar GE2017 ." In 2018, the Interrupters broke into the U.S. charts with their single "She's Kerosene." By 2019, several publications started wondering aloud whether a "fourth wave" of ska was about to emerge. [54] [55]
Regional scenes Nigeria Afrobeat (also known as Afrofunk[ citation needed ]) is a Nigerian music genre that involves the combination of West African musical styles from mainly Nigeria such as the traditional Yoruba and Igbo music and highlife with American funk , jazz , and soul influences. [1] With a focus on chanted vocals, complex intersecting rhythms, and percussion. [2] The style was pioneered in the 1960s by Nigerian multi-instrumentalist and bandleader Fela Kuti , who is most known for popularizing the style both within and outside Nigeria. At the height of his popularity, he was referred to as one of Africa's most "challenging and charismatic music performers." [3] Distinct from Afrobeat is Afrobeats , a combination of sounds originating in West Africa in the 21st century. This takes on diverse influences and is an eclectic combination of genres such as hip hop , house , jùjú , ndombolo , R&B , soca , and dancehall . [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] The two genres, though often conflated, are not the same as Afrobeat is just the amalgamation of afrobeats . [5] [6] Seun Kuti during an Afrobeat performance [8] History Fela Kuti Afrobeat evolved  in Nigeria in the late 1960s by Fela Anikulapo Kuti ,( born Olufela Olusegun Oludotun) who, with drummer Tony Allen , experimented with different contemporary music of that time. Afrobeat was influenced by a combination of  different genres, such as highlife , fuji , and jùjú , [10] as well as Yoruba vocal traditions, rhythm, and instruments. [11] In the late 1950s, Kuti left Lagos to study abroad at the London School of Music where he took lessons in piano, [12] and percussion [13] and was exposed to jazz . Fela Kuti returned to Lagos and played a highlife-jazz hybrid, albeit, without commercial success. [2] In 1969, Kuti and his band went on a trip to the U.S. and met a woman by the name of Sandra Smith, a singer and former Black Panther . Sandra Smith (now known as Sandra Izsadore or Sandra Akanke Isidore) introduced Kuti to many writings of activists such as Martin Luther King Jr. , Angela Davis , Jesse Jackson , and his biggest influence of all, Malcolm X . [5] As Kuti was interested in African-American politics, Smith would make it his duty to inform Kuti of current events. In return, Kuti would fill her in on African culture. Since Kuti stayed at Smith's house and spent so much time with her, he started to re-evaluate his music genre. That was when Kuti realized that he was not playing African music. From that day forward, Kuti changed his sound and the message behind his music. [14] Upon arriving in Nigeria, Kuti had also changed the name of his group to " Africa '70 ". The new sound hailed from a club he established called the Afrika Shrine . The band maintained a five-year residency at the Afrika Shrine from 1970 to 1975 while Afrobeat thrived among Nigerian youth. [5] Another influential person Ray Stephen Oche [ de ], a Nigerian musician touring from Paris, France, with his Matumbo orchestra in the 1970s. The name was partially born out of an attempt to distinguish Fela Kuti's music from the soul music of American artists such as James Brown . [15] Prevalent in his and Lagbaja 's music are native Nigerian harmonies and rhythms, taking contrasting elements and combining, modernizing, and improvising upon them. Politics is essential to Afrobeat, due to Kuti using social criticism to pave the way for change. His message can be described as confrontational and controversial, which relates to the political climate of most of the African countries in the 1970s, many of which were dealing with political injustice and military corruption while recovering from the transition from colonial governments to self-determination. As the genre spread throughout the African continent, many bands took up the style. The recordings of these bands and their songs were rarely heard or exported outside the originating countries but many can now be found on compilation albums and CDs from specialist record shops.[ citation needed ] Influence Many jazz musicians have been attracted to the aromatic genre of Afrobeat. From Roy Ayers in the 1970s to Randy Weston in the 1990s, there have been collaborations that resulted in albums such as Africa: Centre of the World by Roy Ayers, released on the Polydore label in 1981. In 1994, Branford Marsalis , the American jazz saxophonist, included samples of Fela's "Beasts of No Nation" on his Buckshot LeFonque album. Afrobeat has also profoundly influenced various important[ according to whom? ] contemporary producers and musicians, such as Brian Eno and David Byrne , who credit Fela Kuti as an essential influence. [16] Both worked on Talking Heads ' highly acclaimed 1980 album Remain in Light , which brought polyrhythmic Afrobeat influences to Western music. The new generation of DJs and musicians of the 2000s who have fallen in love with both Kuti's material and other rare releases have made compilations and remixes of these recordings, thus re-introducing the genre to new generations of listeners and fans of afropop and groove . In the late 1990s and early 2000s, a small Afrobeat scene began in Brooklyn , New York, with projects including Antibalas , The Daktaris and the Kokolo Afrobeat Orchestra . Since then, other artists like Zongo Junction have come onto the scene. Many others have cited Afrobeat as an influence like Daptone Records-adjacent groups The Budos Band and El Michels Affair . The horn section of Antibalas have been guest musicians on TV on the Radio 's highly acclaimed 2008 album Dear Science , as well as on British band Foals ' 2008 album Antidotes . Further examples are Val Veneto, Radio Bantu, Tam Tam Afrobeat, Combo Makabro, Marabunta Orquesta, Minga!, Antropofonica, Guanabana Afrobeat Orquesta, El Gran Capitan, Morbo y Mambo, Luka Afrobeat Orquesta or NikiLauda. Some Afrobeat influence can also be found in the music of Vampire Weekend and Paul Simon . In 2020, Antibalas was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Global Music Album . [17] Afrobeat artists of the 2000s and present, continue to follow in the footsteps of Fela Kuti. Some examples of these artists are his sons Femi Kuti and Seun Kuti , [18] Franck Biyong & Massak (from Cameroon), London Afrobeat Collective (from London, UK), Segun Damisa & the Afro-beat Crusaders , Shaolin Afronauts (from Adelaide, Australia), Newen Afrobeat (from Santiago, Chile), Eddy Taylor & the Heartphones (from Cologne, Germany), Bantucrew , the Albinoid Afrobeat Orchestra / Albinoid Sound System (from Strasbourg, France), Underground System / Underground System Afrobeat (from Brooklyn, New York), Abayomy Afrobeat Orquestra, Chicago Afrobeat Orchestra, Warsaw Afrobeat Orchestra, Karl Hector & the Malcouns (from Munich, Germany), Ojibo Afrobeat (from Vilnius, Lithuania), Afrodizz and Dele Sosimi and the ex-Africa '70 members Oghene Kologbo (guitar) with Afrobeat Academy , Nicholas Addo-Nettey (percussion), who is also known as Pax Nicholas [ de ], with Ridimtaksi (both based in Berlin, Germany). Namibian artist EES (Eric Sell) associates Afrobeat with reggae and kwaito . In 2009, the music label Knitting Factory Records (KFR) produced the Broadway musical Fela! The story showcased Kuti's "courage and incredible musical mastery" along with the story of his life. The show had 11 Tony nominations, receiving three for Best Costumes, Best Sound and Best Choreography. Fela! was on Broadway for 15 months and was produced by notables such as Shawn "Jay-Z " Carter and Will and Jada Pinkett-Smith . Many celebrities were noted as attending the shows, including Denzel Washington , Madonna, Sting, Spike Lee (who saw it eight times), Kofi Annan , and Michelle Obama . Michelle Williams , former singer of girl group Destiny's Child , was cast as the role of Sandra Izsadore. [19] Fela Kuti's music has been sampled by various hip-hop musicians such as Missy Elliott , J. Cole , Kanye West , as well as other popular acts such as Beyoncé . [20] [21] The "Festival de Afrobeat Independiente" (FAI) takes place regularly in Buenos Aires , where regional bands as well as renown Afrobeat acts perform. See also
2023: NewJeans at Lollapalooza (first K-pop girl group to perform) [221] Social media Social media sites such as YouTube , Twitter , and Facebook allow K-pop artists to reach a global audience and to communicate readily with their fans. [222] As global online music market revenue increased 19% from 2009 to 2014 with social media, music consumers around the world are more likely to be exposed to K-pop. [223] K-pop idol groups benefit from video-based social media such as YouTube since visual components such as dance and fashion are essential factors in their performance. The number of searches of "K-pop" on YouTube increased by a factor of 33 from 2004 to 2014. Through social media advertisement, Korean entertainment companies narrowed the cultural gap so K-pop could enter the global market and gain recognition among overseas consumers. The export of K-pop dramatically increased from US$13.9 million to US$204 million between 2007 and 2011. [223] Social media also changes the consumption patterns of K-pop music. Before the digital era, people would purchase and consume music products on an individual basis. Consumers now actively participate in sharing music products and advertising their favorite artists, which is advantageous for K-pop. K-pop fandoms are highly active on the said platforms as well as the likes of Instagram , TikTok , Reddit , Tumblr and Twitch . [224] YouTube Psy , whose music video for " Gangnam Style " in December 2012 became the first to reach more than a billion YouTube views [225] Since K-pop started to spread its industry outside South Korea, K-pop artists have set notable records on YouTube. Of the 2.28 billion worldwide K-pop YouTube views in 2011, 240 million came from the United States, more than double the figure from 2010 (94 million).[ citation needed ] In December 2011, K-pop became the first country-specific genre of music to gain a homepage on YouTube. [222] In December 2012, Psy's music video for "Gangnam Style" became the first YouTube video to receive 1 billion views. [226] In 2016 the music video for the song " TT " by Twice became the first video by a female Korean act with over 400 million YouTube views. [227] On January 21, 2019, girl group Blackpink 's music video for " Ddu-Du-Ddu-Du " became the highest viewed K-pop group music video on YouTube. [228] On May 21, 2021, BTS' music video for " Butter " set a record for the most viewed online music video in the first 24 hours, garnering over 108 million views. [229] Twitter Twitter has also been a significant social media platform for K-pop stars to get connections and promotions. [230] The viral song "Gangnam Style" gained popularity from mentions by prominent Twitter users. [230] Bang Si Hyuk, the producer of BTS, partially attributed the fast growth of their fanbase to social media such as Twitter. [231] On November 13, 2017, BTS became the first South Korean act to reach 10 million followers on Twitter. [232] [233] In 2017, BTS was the most tweeted-about artist both in the United States and globally. Other K-pop groups, such as Seventeen and Monsta X , also appeared in the global top ten. Exo, a South Korean boyband, was the most followed celebrity to have entered Twitter in 2017. [234] At the 2017, 2018, and 2019 Billboard Music Awards, BTS won the award for Top Social Media Artist based on Twitter voting by their fans. [235] [236] [237] According to Sin Chang Seob, the CEO of Twitter Korea, the usage of Twitter by K-pop artists has increased Twitter's popularity among South Koreans. [238] Facebook Many Korean entertainment companies use social media platforms, especially Facebook, to promote and communicate about their global auditions. [222] K-pop groups use Facebook pages to promote their music and other content to large numbers of fans. [239] K-pop fans use Facebook to express their devotion, communicate with other members of the K-pop community, and consume K-pop content. [240] TikTok Multiple entertainment companies use TikTok to market and promote their artists' music. Many K-pop songs have gone viral on TikTok and some K-pop artists and their labels were contacted for possible collaborations. The " Any Song " dance challenge by rapper Zico got 400 million views in less than two months, and around 830,000 videos have been uploaded featuring the sound. [241] Fifty Fifty 's song " Cupid " went viral on TikTok with over 400,000 videos published with the sound. Prior to the TikTok audio, Fifty Fifty were averaging 300,000 monthly listeners, to now having over a million. [242] TikTok continues to be an avenue in which K-pop artists can receive exposure and recognition. Popularity and impact This article may contain excessive or irrelevant examples. Please help improve the article by adding descriptive text and removing less pertinent examples . (September 2023) This section may be too long and excessively detailed. Please consider summarizing the material. (September 2023) East Asia Japan Following the lifting of WWII -era restrictions imposed on exchanges and trade between Korea and Japan in the late 1990s, the first-generation girl group S.E.S became the first Korean artists to debut in Japan in late 1998, releasing their first Japanese-language album Reach Out in 1999. Young K-pop star BoA had Japanese-language training before her Korean debut and when she debuted in Japan in 2002 with her first Japanese-language album Listen to My Heart , her Korean identity was inessential, as her music style and fluency in Japanese led her to be considered a part of J-pop. [243] Listen to My Heart was the first album by a Korean singer to debut atop the Japanese Oricon Charts and become an RIAJ-certified "million-seller" in Japan. [244] BoA has since released several Japanese albums , most of which have topped the Oricon Charts. [245] Following BoA's successful Japanese debut, TVXQ debuted in Japan in 2005 under a procedure similar to BoA's. TVXQ did not promote their Korean identity, and their ballad-style songs fit well into J-pop's typical sound. TVXQ's first and second albums released in Japan were minor successes, peaking on the Oricon Charts at twenty-five and ten respectively.[ citation needed ] However, on January 16, 2008, TVXQ reached the top of the Oricon Charts with their sixteenth Japanese single " Purple Line ", becoming the first Korean male group to have a number-one single in Japan. [246] [247] They have since had remarkable success with their comebacks. In 2018, they accumulated over 1.2 million people to their concerts, beating Japanese band B'z . [248] Since the start of the Korean Wave, the Japanese market has seen an influx of Korean pop acts such as SS501 , [249] Shinee, [250] Super Junior, [251] Big Bang, [252] Kara, and Girls' Generation. [253] In 2011, it was reported that the total sales for K-pop artists' increased 22.3% between 2010 and 2011 in Japan. Some Korean artists were in the top 10 selling artists of the year in Japan. [254] As of 2019, several other K-pop groups have debuted in the Japanese market including Exo, BTS, Got7 , Seventeen , iKon , GFriend , Astro , Pentagon , Twice, Monsta X , FT Island , NCT 127 and Blackpink . [255] [ unreliable source? ] Many of these groups debut with Japanese versions of their recent Korean releases, then later release original Japanese songs. Many groups such as NCT 127, Twice, and Pentagon also include Japanese members that auditioned in Japan and were brought to Korea, or came to Korea in order to become a K-pop singer. With tensions still remaining between Korea and Japan, the import of Korean popular culture has been met with different forms of resistance, in the form of the 'Anti-Korean Wave.' One demonstration against the Korean Wave with roughly 500 participants was broadcast on Japan's Fuji TV to an Internet audience of over 120,000. However, the chairman of the Presidential Council on National Branding cited this resistance as proof of "how successful Korean Wave is." [256] The Korean Wave has also interested Japanese people to pursue a pop music career by going to Korea to become K-pop stars. [257] China Chinese singer Zhang Bichen , later a member of K-pop girl group Sunny Days, performs during 2012's K-POP World Festival. The 1990s saw the rise of K-pop in China through groups like H.O.T. and Sechs Kies —sparking China's investment in Korea's entertainment industry. K-pop artists have achieved considerable success in China since then: in 2005, Rain held a concert in Beijing with 40,000 attendees. [110] In 2010, the Wonder Girls won an award for the highest digital sales for a foreign artist, with 5 million digital downloads, in the 5th annual China Mobile Wireless Music Awards. [258] Most recently, China has become the South Korean entertainment industry's biggest market for exports. [259] Twelve percent of SM Entertainment 's sales in 2015 went to China, and this number rose to 14.4 percent by the middle of 2016. [260] China has found that K-pop is a profitable investment. [261] According to Director of Communication for the Korea Economic Institute of America Jenna Gibson, sales for a certain shampoo brand rose by 630% after Super Junior endorsed it on a Chinese reality show. [261] K-pop's popularity has also led China's e-commerce company Alibaba to buy roughly $30 million worth of SM Entertainment's shares in 2016 in order to help its expansion into the online music industry. [262] Legend Capital China has also invested in BTS ' label BigHit Entertainment . [261] As of the beginning of 2017, China took up around 8–20 percent of major Korean entertainment companies' total sales. [260] Chinese entertainment companies have also claimed stakes in the industry, partially overseeing groups like EXID and T-ara or representing groups which include both Chinese and Korean members like Uniq and WJSN . [261] Having Chinese members in K-pop groups is one way that Korean entertainment companies increase K-pop's marketability and appeal in China. Other strategies include giving Korean members Chinese-sounding names, releasing songs or whole albums in Chinese, and making subgroups with members that predominantly speak Mandarin [262] —like SM Entertainment's Exo-M and Super Junior-M , which has had successful results on the Kuang Nan Record and CCR. [263] The K-pop industry's methods of producing idols have influenced the practices of Chinese entertainment companies, which aim to reproduce K-pop idols' success with their own stars so that Chinese entertainers can compete better globally. To achieve this, those companies have recruited K-pop industry experts, and some of these insiders have actively started moving into the Chinese music industry to capitalize on K-pop's increasing influence on market demands. Chinese reality show Idol Producer further highlights K-pop's impact on China's entertainment scene: closely mirroring Korea's Produce 101 . [261] Hong Kong singer Jackson Wang from Got7 at a fansigning event in Yeouido A number of Chinese K-pop idols, such as Super Junior-M's Han Geng and Exo-M's Kris , Luhan , and Tao , have left their respective K-pop groups in order to pursue solo careers in China. However, lately, Korean entertainment companies have allowed their Chinese K-pop idols more freedom in pursuing solo work in China. [261] Got7 's Jackson Wang , for example, has released several of his own songs in China and, in 2017, reached number one on Chinese music charts. [264] Additionally, the rise of K-pop has led to an increase in the number of Chinese tourists in South Korea—3.8 million more Chinese toured South Korea in 2016 than 2015 according to the Union of International Associations . [265] K-pop has also made China's youth find South Korean culture "cool", [266] thus helping to facilitate greater understanding between Korea and China. [267] North Korea Despite North Korea's traditionally strict isolationism , K-pop has managed to reach a North Korean audience. While consumption of South Korean entertainment is punishable by death in North Korea, [268] it has still become increasingly more available with the global rise of technology and the implementation of underground smuggling networks over the past decades. [269] The popular flash drive technology containing K-pop and K-dramas was preceded by the use of DVDs burned with such content. Because North Korean law enforcement had figured out how to catch people consuming the media from DVDs, few people accessed K-pop and K-dramas. [270] Many North Koreans considered the risk too great, so it was not until the proliferation of the flash drive media type that watching the K-pop shows hit common homes. Utilizing the increasingly sophisticated smuggling networks, several thousands of USB drives and SD cards containing K-pop and K-dramas have been distributed and sold through care packages and the black market. [271] Some South Korean humanitarians have also deployed drones and balloons carrying these flash drives in order to make the media more accessible. [272] Access to USB drives and SD cards rose exponentially from 26% to 81% in from 2010 to 2014 largely due to development in technology, with a large majority containing South Korean music and dramas. [273] The expanding technology capabilities allowed the flash drives to be accessed by a wider North Korean audience. Flash drives that used to cost upwards of US$50, can now be purchased for under $10, making them more affordable and easier to send into North Korea. [270] The content on these USB drives and SD cards are then viewed by plugging the device into a Notel , a small portable media player. [271] Although this practice had originally begun with banned books and simple radios, there is now an even higher demand for South Korean media following the cultural phenomena of hallyu . Those near the border who choose to stay away from the banned media from flash drives often cannot escape it. Ever since the 1950s, both countries have blasted their own propaganda across the DMZ : North Korea broadcasting anti-south propaganda and South Korea broadcasting Korean and world news as well as K-pop. [272] In 2004, both countries agreed to end the broadcasts. After an incident in 2015, South Korea resumed broadcasting anti-North news for four days, as well as in 2016, after North Korea tested its hydrogen bomb and has been broadcasting since. In April 2018, in preparation and out of respect for the meeting between North leader Kim Jong Un and South leader, Moon Jae In, the South Korean speakers ceased their broadcasts. These 11 loudspeakers can be heard up to six miles (10 km) into North Korean territory. This enables the broadcasts to influence possible defectors staying near the border as well as create bothersome propaganda that North Korean soldiers cannot escape. [272] The dissemination of K-pop and Korean media has been crucial in presenting the realities of North Korea to its citizens. By detailing the basic conditions of life in South Korea and introducing foreign ideologies, Korean media has aroused civil unrest amongst both citizens and elites concerning the disparities between living conditions inside and outside North Korea. [271] A defector explains that, when he escaped in 2012, only the wealthy families were the ones consuming the South Korean media because the costs of the flash drives and technology to use them were so high. Because most youths lacked the resources to afford the drives, most consumers of South Korean media before 2012 were the middle-aged elite who favored K-dramas over K-pop due to their more traditional behavior. [274] The current high demand for Korean media continues to rise as now approximately 70% of North Koreans consume foreign media in their homes, [271] which accounts for the higher youth following of South Korean media today. One researcher at the Korea Institute for National Unification claims to have never met a single defector who had not seen or listened to foreign media before entering South Korea. Yet experts remain wary that a cultural uprising will occur because of the media. Consuming South Korean media serves many purposes for North Koreans such as enjoyment and education, but few consider uprooting a totalitarian regime because of the cultures they've experienced through K-pop and K-dramas. [275] Even North Korean leader Kim Jong Un has shown a liking for K-pop music. In 2018, Kim stated he was "deeply moved" after attending a two-hour concert in Pyongyang featuring South Korean performers such as singer Cho Yong-pil and the popular girl band Red Velvet . [276] This historic concert marks the first performance by South Korean artists attended by a North Korean leader in Pyongyang. The concert featuring over 150 South Korean artists, attended by 1500 North Korean elites, [277] also displays growing relations between the North and the South. None of the song line ups, lyrics, or dance moves of the performers were asked to be changed by traditionalist North Korean officials. This acceptance of the K-pop genre and its content shows a stark contrast to Kim Jong Un's historically stringent policies on foreign media. The South Korean artists also performed alongside notable North Korean artists in the following week. Recordings of both performances have been made public to South Koreans, though no reports have been made of their release to the North Korean public. [278] Despite all the previous events Kim Jong-un has changed his stance on K-pop since 2021 by referring to it as a "vicious cancer" and viewing it as a threat to North Korean society. [279] Taiwan Despite sharing a similar past, the Taiwanese did not carry a positive sentiment towards South Korea after 1992, which is when South Korea broke off its diplomatic relationship with Taiwan in order to pursue one with mainland China. This changed in the early 2000s as the cultural dispersion of Hallyu has contributed to the reconstruction of South Korea's image among the Taiwanese. This change was partly prompted by the South Korean government, which wished to encourage goodwill between the two countries after the break of diplomacy. Many Taiwanese have since remarked that Korean popular music and Korean dramas have helped to foster a renewed interest and healthier relationship with South Korea. [280] Southeast Asia Singapore There is a thriving K-pop fanbase in Singapore, where idol groups, such as 2NE1 , BTS , Girls' Generation , Got7 and Exo , often hold concert tour dates. [281] [282] The popularity of K-pop alongside Korean dramas has influenced the aesthetics image of Singaporeans. Korean-style "straight eyebrows" have become quite popular among many Singaporean females and males of Chinese, Malay and Indian descent. [283] Singaporean beauty salons have seen an increase in the number of customers interested in getting Korean-style "straight eyebrows" and Korean-style haircuts in recent years. [284] On August 5, 2017, Singapore hosted the 10th Music Bank World Tour, a concert spin-off of Music Bank, a popular weekly music programme by South Korean broadcaster KBS . This event proved the immense popularity of the Hallyu wave in Singapore. [285] In recent years, several notable entertainment companies (both big and small scale), like Attrakt and YG Entertainment , came to Singapore to conduct auditions to select eligible candidates to train in South Korea, [286] [287] and a K-pop international school is also set to be established in Singapore with the collaboration between Singapore Raffles Music College (SRMC) and the prestigious School of Performing Arts Seoul (Sopa). [288] According to Singaporean national newspaper The Straits Times in February 2024, over 120 teenage girls (mostly Singaporeans) took part in Attrakt‘s first and only on-site audition at Kallang Place , which aimed to recruit possible candidates to join the agency’s girl group Fifty Fifty . [289] Malaysia In Malaysia, among the three main ethnic groups— Malay , Chinese and Indian —many prefer to listen to music in their own languages, but K-pop and Korean movies and TV series have become popular among all three ethnic groups, which Malaysian firms have capitalized upon. [290] The popularity of K-pop has also resulted in politicians bringing K-pop idols to the country in order to attract young voters. [291] Malaysians have accepted the Korean Wave more rapidly and even more favorably, notably in the 2010s, despite the fact that it came to Malaysia later and that the first reaction there was relatively hostile compared to other nations. Approximately 80% of Malaysian respondents have begun learning the Korean language due to their keen interest in Korean culture. Malaysia is also seventh in the world for the quantity of travelers visiting Korea. [292] Indonesia K-pop along with Korean TV series and movies has turned into popular culture, especially among the young generation of Indonesia. This trend can be observed in any major city in the country. K-pop has also influenced music in Indonesia. [293] Popularity of Korean culture has increased continuously in Indonesia since the early 2000s, starting with the East Asian popular culture boom. [294] Philippines 2NE1 at a press conference in Manila Korean telenovelas were aired locally in the Philippines starting in 2003, marking a further expansion of the Hallyu wave. [295] K-pop took longer to catch on; it gained popularity through the internet, and through Korean expatriate celebrities like Sandara Park .[ citation needed ] Super Junior held a concert in the Philippines in 2010. [296] Vietnam Vietnam already had numerous contacts with South Korea in the past and even shared a similar political situation, notably the separation in half of both nations. Despite the tragedies of the Vietnam War , the country presently remains welcoming of the Korean influence on the Vietnamese population. [297] Vietnamese pop music, known as V-pop , is heavily influenced by K-pop in terms of music production and music videos. In 2015, the northern capital city of Hanoi hosted the Music Bank World Tour. [298] In the year of 2018, V Live and RBW Entertainment Vietnam launched special monthly mini-concerts called "V Heartbeat Live", inviting both V-pop and K-pop stars to perform, such as Winner , Momoland , IKon , Sunmi , and more. In the same year, Park Ji-yeon collaborated with a Vietnamese singer, Soobin Hoàng Sơn, releasing Vietnamese and Korean versions of the single "Between Us." [299] K-pop, and Korean culture in general, gained popularity mainly because of the Vietnamese youth. [297] South Korean entertainment companies are investing and searching for talent in Vietnam. For example, SM Entertainment announced plans for a Vietnamese sub-unit of the Korean boy group NCT , which executive producer Lee Soo-man called "NCT-V", to promote V-pop globally. Lee also said that Vietnamese culture is extremely similar to Korean culture, which is favorable for both countries in terms of global expansion. [300] In 2018, SM Entertainment hosted their annual Global Audition in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City for the first time ever. [301] Cube Entertainment held an audition session in 2018. [302] On January 11–13 in 2019, Big Hit Entertainment established a joint venture with entertainment company CJ E&M to host an audition called the "2019 Belift Global Audition." [303] SBS also announced that popular variety show " Running Man " will be getting a Vietnamese version. These are prime examples of hallyu and the rising popularity of K-pop in Vietnam. South Asia Bangladesh Bangladeshi youths, especially teens, have shown great attraction to Korean pop music as they described such songs make them feel better. [304] Starting from 2015, Bangladesh began to participate in an annual event called K-Pop World Music Festival which started in 2011 by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea in cooperation with The Korean Broadcasting System (KBS) . The objective of the event is not only to bring the Hallyu fans all over the world to South Korea but also to bring people from different countries together in the name of culture. [305] India In the Northeast Indian state of Manipur , where separatists have banned Bollywood movies, consumers have turned to Korean popular culture for their entertainment needs. The BBC 's correspondent Sanjoy Majumder reported that Korean entertainment products are mostly unlicensed copies smuggled in from neighbouring Burma, and are generally well received by the local population. This has led to the increasing use of Korean phrases in common parlance amongst the young people of Manipur. [306] [307] [308] In order to capitalize on the popularity of K-pop in Manipur, many hairdressing salons have offered "Korean-style" cuts based on the hairstyles of K-pop boy bands. [306] [307] This wave of Korean popular culture is currently spreading from Manipur to the neighbouring state of Nagaland . K-pop is catching up in various other states of the country and K-pop festivals and competitions draw thousands of fans. [309] [310] Nepal In Nepal , K-pop gained popularity along with Korean dramas and films. K-pop has become influential in the Nepali music industry and K-pop music videos are often used as an accompaniment to Nepali music on YouTube .[ citation needed ] United States BTS on the red carpet at KCON New York 2016 In 2006, Rain held sold-out concerts in New York City and Las Vegas as part of his Rain's Coming World Tour In 2009, the Wonder Girls became the first K-pop artist to debut on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart. [311] They went on to join the Jonas Brothers on the Jonas Brothers World Tour 2009 . In 2010, they toured 20 cities in the United States, Canada and Mexico, and were named House of Blues "Artist of the Month" for June. [312] In 2010, SM Entertainment held the SMTown Live '10 World Tour with dates in Los Angeles, Paris, Tokyo, and New York. The same year, during the 8th Annual Korean Music Festival , K-pop artists made their first appearances at the Hollywood Bowl . [313] Notable K-pop concerts in the United States in 2011 include the KBS Concert at the New York Korea Festival, the K-Pop Masters Concert in Las Vegas, and the Korean Music Wave in Google, which was held at Google 's headquarters in Mountain View, California . [314] Rain at the 2011 Time 100 gala at Lincoln Center in New York City 2012 marked a breakthrough year for K-pop in North America. [315] [316] At the start of the year, Girls' Generation performed the English version of " The Boys " on the late-night talk show The Late Show with David Letterman and also on the daytime talk show Live! with Kelly , becoming the first Korean musical act to perform on these shows, and the first Korean act to perform on syndicated television in the United States. [317] In the same year, the group formed their first sub-unit, entitled Girls' Generation-TTS , or simply "TTS", composed of members Taeyeon , Tiffany , and Seohyun . The subgroup's debut EP, Twinkle , peaked at #126 on the Billboard 200. [318] In May, SMTown returned to California again with the SMTown Live World Tour III in Anaheim . In August, as part of their New Evolution Global Tour , 2NE1 held their first American concert in the New York Metropolitan Area at the Prudential Center of Newark, New Jersey . [319] In November, as part of their Alive Tour, BigBang held their first solo concert in America, visiting the Honda Center in Los Angeles and the Prudential Center in Newark. The tickets sold out in only a few hours, and additional dates were added. [320] On November 13, the American singer-songwriter Madonna and backup dancers performed " Gangnam Style " alongside Psy during a concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City. Psy later told reporters that his gig with Madonna had "topped his list of accomplishments." [321] On January 29, 2013, Billboard , one of America's most popular music magazines, launched Billboard K-Town , an online column on its website that covered K-pop news, artists, concerts, and chart information. [322] [323] [324] In March of that year, f(x) performed at the K-Pop Night Out at SXSW in Austin, Texas , alongside The Geeks , who represented Korean rock. f(x) was the first K-pop group ever to perform at SXSW. [325] Mnet hosted its Kcon event in NY and LA in July 2016. [326] [327] Donika Sterling, an American K-Pop fan diagnosed with Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease , was sponsored to meet her favorite idols in South Korea. [328] [329] In 2017, BTS was nominated for the Top Social Artist Award at the 2017 Billboard Music Awards . Their winning of the award marks the first time a Korean group has won a Billboard Award, and the second time a Korean artist has won the award, after Psy's win in 2013. [330] [331] BTS won the award at the 2017, 2018, and 2019 Billboard Music Awards, as well as Top Duo/Group in 2019. [332] They performed at the 2017 American Music Awards and the 2018 Billboard Music Awards, making them one of the first Korean groups to have performed at either awards show. [333] [334] BTS's album Love Yourself: Tear reached #1 on the Billboard 200 , making it the first Korean act to do so. [335] Additionally, BTS's single " Fake Love " debuted at #10 on the Billboard Hot 100 , making them the second Korean artist to chart in the top ten. [336] On August 21, 2020, BTS' song Dynamite debuted at number 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 , making it the first ever single of a Korean artist to top the Billboard chart. Their next single, Life Goes On , also managed to top the chart upon release on November 20, 2020. Latin America Many idol groups have loyal fan bases in Latin America. [337] [338] [339] Since 2009, about 260 fan clubs with a total of over 20,000 and 8,000 active members have been formed in Chile and Peru , respectively. [340] [341] In recent years, an increasing number of K-pop groups have performed in Latin America. [342] In 2011, the United Cube Concert was held in São Paulo , shortly after the second round of the first K-Pop Cover Dance Festival was held in Brazil, with MBLAQ as judges. [343] In March 2012, JYJ performed in Chile and Peru. When the group arrived at the Jorge Chávez International Airport in Peru for the JYJ World Tour Concert, they were escorted by airport security officials through a private exit due to safety reasons concerning the large number of fans (over 3,000). [344] At the Explanada Sur del Estadio Monumental in Lima, some fans camped out for days in to see JYJ. [345] In April, Caracol TV and Arirang TV jointly aired a K-pop reality show in Colombia . [346] In September, Junsu became the first K-pop idol to perform solo in Brazil and Mexico, after the Wonder Girls in Monterrey in 2009. [347] The concerts sold out well in advance. [347] That year there were 70 K-pop fan clubs in Mexico, with at least 60,000 members altogether. [348] In January 2014, Kim Hyung-jun performed in Peru, Chile, and Bolivia, becoming the first K-pop idol to perform in Bolivia. [349] When he arrived in Peru, where the tour began, about 1,000 fans cheered for him, followed him wherever Kim Hyung-joon went, and they caused serious traffic jams. [350] Fans were also seen pitching their tents outside the concert venue for days before the actual concert. [351] [352] In 2013, the boy group Super Junior performed in four South American countries ― Brazil, Argentina, Chile and Peru—as part of its Super Show 5 tour. Additionally, that same year on November 7, it had a show at Mexico City Arena, which attracted over 17,000 fans. Super Junior performed on April 27, 2018, at Mexico City Arena, a stage where various famous Latin American artists such as Ozuna , J Balvin , and Marco Antonio Solís also performed in 2018. [353] NU'EST held concerts in Mexico, Brazil, Chile and Peru in 2014. [342] In 2017, BTS visited Brazil and Chile where it performed as part of the Live Trilogy Episode III, the Wings Tour . [354] On March 11–12, 2017, BTS held concerts in Santiago, Chile, and in Sao Paulo , Brazil, on March 19–20. As rookies, Dreamcatcher visited 4 cities in Brazil as part of their 2017 Fly High world tour, [355] and later returned to Latin America in 2018, visiting Argentina, Chile, Peru, Colombia and Panama as part of their Welcome to the Dream World world tour. [356] Mexico Korean media in Mexico experienced a surge in 2002 after Mexican governor, Arturo Montiel Rojas , visited South Korea. [357] From his trip, he brought Korean series, movies, and other programs to Mexico State's broadcasting channel: [358] Televisión Mexiquense (channel 34). Korean dramas exposed the Mexican public to Korean products and spurred interest in other aspects of Korean culture. K-pop began to gain ground in Mexico due to the series the music accompanied. Fans particularly sought out the music of soundtracks respective to Korean dramas that were broadcast. However, K-pop's arrival to Mexico is also attributed to the influence of Japanese media in Mexico and the introduction of PIU (Pump It Up). The comic convention, La Mole, commenced selling Japanese comics and music and later commenced to sell K-pop. PIUs combined gaming and dancing, introducing the Mexican youth to Korean gaming software and generating interest in Korean music. [359] KCON in Mexico City K-pop's presence in Mexico can be outlined through the growing number of Korean music acts in the country. In recent years, the number of K-pop concerts in Mexico has risen and branched into other portions of the country. Idol groups, including BigBang and NU'EST , have visited Mexico through their respective world tours. JYJ's Kim Junsu became the first Korean star to perform solo. His concert held in Mexico City sold out in advance. [360] The Music Bank World Tour also brought various acts to the Mexican public. Many of those groups covered widely known songs, such as Exo's cover of Sabor A Mi. In 2017, Mexico also became the first Latin American country to host KCON . The two-day convention held on March 17–18 brought over 33,000 fans to Arena Ciudad de México . [361] Much like artists during Music Bank, idols covered Spanish songs. The strength and large number of fan clubs have continuously helped promote and support K-pop across the country. Over 70 fan clubs dedicated to Korean music are present in Mexico, bringing together around 30,000 fans. [362] Although many fan clubs were created around 2003, they achieved a public presence in 2005 when Korea's ex-president Roh Moo Hyun visited Mexico for a meeting with Mexico's ex-president Vicente Fox Quesada . Around 30 Hallyu fan clubs held a "rally" asking Roh to bring actors Jang Dong-gun and Ahn Jae-wook to their country. [363] Demonstrations have continued into recent years. On May 13, 2013, a large march was held in Mexico City's Zócalo. Called KPOP: Massive March K–Pop Mexico II, it was the second mass march that brought together hundreds of avid K-Pop fans. [364] However, larger fan club organizations in Mexico receive indirect or direct support from Korean cultural programs. KOFICE (Korea Foundation for International Cultural Exchange) [365] and the Korean Cultural Center, Mexico City often work in conjunction with fan clubs. These larger organizations contain multiple fan clubs within their structure. The three largest are MexiCorea, Hallyu Mexican Lovers, and HallyuMx. Both MexiCorea and Hallyu Mexican Lovers are supported by KOFICE while HallyuMx previously worked with the Korean Cultural Center and the Embassy of the Republic of Korea in Mexico. [359] Europe In 2010, both the SMTown Live '10 World Tour and the Super Junior Super Show 4 Tour were held in Paris. K-pop fans in Warsaw holding a South Korean-Polish flag as well as banners of various boy bands In February 2011, Teen Top performed at the Sala Apolo concert hall in Barcelona. In May, Rain became the first K-pop artist to perform in Germany, during the Dresden Music Festival. [366] JYJ also performed in both Berlin and Barcelona. BigBang flew to Belfast and won the Best Worldwide Act during the 2011 MTV EMAs in Northern Ireland. [367] In Poland, the K-pop Star Exhibition was held in the Warsaw Korean Culture Center. Beast performing at the Beautiful Show in Berlin In February 2012, Beast held their Beautiful Show in Berlin. According to the Berliner Zeitung , many fans who attended were not just from Germany but also from neighbouring countries such as France and Switzerland. [368] Also in February, the Music Bank World Tour drew more than 10,000 fans to the Palais Omnisports de Paris-Bercy . [369] That year, artists such as Beast and 4Minute performed during the United Cube Concert in London, where the MBC Korean Culture Festival was also held. [370] When Shinee arrived at the London Heathrow Airport for a concert at the Odeon West End in the same year, part of the airport became temporarily overrun by frenzied fans. The reservation system of the Odeon West End crashed for the first time one minute after ticket sales began as the concert drew an unexpectedly large response. [371] At this time, Shinee also held a 30-minute performance at the Abbey Road Studio . The ticket demand for this performance was so high that fashion magazine Elle gave away forty tickets through a lottery, and the performance was also televised in Japan through six different channels. [256] Also in 2012, BigBang won the Best Fan category in the Italian TRL Awards . [372] In March 2022, KPOP.FLEX took place at Deutsche Bank Park Stadium in Frankfurt , Germany. Over 65,000 fans attended from over 80 different countries. [373] Russia K-pop also saw a surge in popularity in Russia. On September 6, 2011, 57 dance teams took part in the K-pop Cover Dance Festival . [374] During the second round of the competition, Shinee flew to Moscow as judges, also performing to Russian fans. [375] The following year, Russian youths launched K-Plus, a Korean culture magazine, and the number of Russian K-pop fans was reported at 50,000. [376] On February 3, 2014, Park Jung-min became the first ever Korean singer to hold a solo concert in Moscow. [377] [378] in club Moscow Hall 600 place with tour "Park Jung Min Reverso Tour." B.A.P held concerts during their tour "Live On Earth 2016 World Tour" in Adrenaline Stadium and their tour "2017 World Tour 'Party Baby!'" in YotaSpace. [379] [380] On June 6, 2018, Got7 performed in the concert hall Adrenaline Stadium in Moscow for their concert tour "Eyes on You." [381] On October 7, 2018 Zico during concert tour "King Of the Zungle" performed at the club ГЛАВCLUB Green Concert in Moscow. [382] On December 8, 2018, on the MTV Russia channel, the project of the mobile operator MTS , MTCamp, was launched (the acronym of their company name and the word amp and at the same time MTV Trainee Camp) [383] the result of which is half a year should be the junior team from 5 members in the style of k-pop. [384] The show is hosted by figure skater Evgenia Medvedeva , a fan of the Korean version of Exo, Exo-K. The show collaborates with the production company Avex Trax . On July 15, Exo's " Power " and BTS' "Fake Love" were played at the 2018 World Cup Final Match in Russia. [385] In 2022, the term "K pop" was included in the French dictionary Larousse. [386] Middle East K-pop has become increasingly popular across the Middle East over recent years, particularly among younger fans. [387] [388] [389] In July 2011, Israeli fans met South Korea's Ambassador to Israel, Ma Young-sam, and traveled to Paris for the SMTown Live '10 World Tour in Europe. [390] According to Dr. Nissim Atmazgin, a professor of East Asian Studies at Hebrew University of Jerusalem , "Many young people look at K-pop as culture capital—something that makes them stand out from the crowd." As of 2012, there are over 5,000 K-pop fans in Israel and 3,000 in the Palestinian territories. [391] Some dedicated Israeli and Palestinian fans see themselves as "cultural missionaries" and actively introduce K-pop to their friends and relatives, further spreading the Hallyu wave within their communities. [392] In 2012, the number of fans in Turkey surpassed 100,000, reaching 150,000 in 2013. [387] [393] ZE:A appeared for a fan meet-and-greet session in Dubai and a concert in Abu Dhabi. [394] [395] In Cairo, hundreds of fans went to the Maadi Library 's stage theater to see the final round of the K-POP Korean Song Festival, organized by the Korean Embassy. [396] [397] In January 2018, boy group Exo was invited to Dubai , United Arab Emirates for the Dubai Fountain Show. Their single " Power " was the first K-pop song to be played at the fountain show. [398] In 2019, boy band BTS was invited to perform at King Fahd International Stadium by Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman . They are the first boy band to play a solo stadium tour in Saudi Arabia. [399] Oceania The K-pop Wave has led to the creation of a number of dance groups that perform dance covers of K-pop music and teach K-pop choreography. In the K-Pop World Festival competition, AO Crew has represented Australia three times—in 2013, 2014, and 2016. [400] Also, another dance cover group, IMI Dance, was the opening show for the RapBeat Show in 2017. [400] Several dance studios provide classes that are based on K-pop choreography. Dance group Crave NV teaches a K-pop class every Saturday at their dance studio in New Zealand. [401] A Sydney-based agency, The academy, began offering K-pop boot camps and other programs in 2016. [402] [403] A number of K-pop idols have hailed from Oceania. Australian-Korean artists include Blackpink 's Rosé , ZE:A's Kevin Kim, One Way 's Peter Hyun, C-Clown 's Rome, Stray Kids ' Bang Chan and Felix, EvoL 's Hayana, and LEDapple 's Hanbyul. [404] [400] [405] In 2011, the K-Pop Music Festival at the ANZ Stadium was held in Sydney, featuring Girls' Generation, TVXQ, Beast, Shinee, 4minute, Miss A , 2AM , and MBLAQ. [406] There was also demand for concerts from New Zealand. [407] In August 2012, NU'EST visited Sydney Harbour and the University of New South Wales , as judges of a K-pop contest being held there. The following year, 4Minute were judges at the same contest in Sydney. [408] In October, Psy toured Australia after his single "Gangnam Style" reached number one in Australia on the ARIA charts . [409] In May 2016, B.A.P held a concert in Auckland, becoming the first K-Pop group to perform in New Zealand. [410] [411] KCON , an annual K-pop music and cultural convention, was launched for the first time in Australia in September 2017. They are the seventh country to host KCON since 2012. [412] It was held at Qudos Bank Arena, Sydney. The lineup for the event was Pentagon , Wanna One , Girl's Day , Cosmic Girls (WJSN) , Exo, SF9 , Victon , Monsta X , and UP10TION . [413] Music shows
Further information: Avex Group Ayumi Hamasaki won Grand Prix awards for three consecutive years—the first time in Japan Record Award history—between 2001 and 2003. [127] Although Hamasaki became very famous, Tom Yoda , then-chairman of her record company Avex Group , argued that her tactics were risky, because Avex disregarded the modern portfolio theory . [128] This concern disappeared when the company's other singers (such as Ai Otsuka , Kumi Koda , and Exile ) also reached a certain level of popularity in the mid-2000s under Yoda's management policy. [128] BoA , a Korean singer also a part of Avex group, also achieved high levels of success although being Korean in Japan. She opened the Hallyu door to other Korean artists so that they may achieve varying levels of success in Japan as well. See also: RIAJ Digital Track Chart In December 2002, the digital-download market for ringtone songs (着うた, chaku-uta) was created by mobile-phone company au . [129] The market for digital downloads grew rapidly, and Hikaru Utada 's 2007 song " Flavor of Life " sold over 7 million downloaded copies. [130] In October 2007, EMI Music Japan announced that Utada was the world's first artist to have 10 million digital sales in one year. [131] According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry 's 2009 digital music report, Thelma Aoyama 's digital single " Soba ni Iru ne " and Greeeen 's digital single " Kiseki " sold 8.2 million copies and 6.2 million copies, respectively, in the 2008 download rankings. [132] Japanese hip hop and urban pop[ edit ] Further information: Japanese hip hop and Hip pop In the first decade of the 21st century, hip hop music and contemporary R&B influences in Japanese music started to gain attention in popular mainstream music. In November 2001, R&B duo Chemistry 's debut album The Way We Are sold over 1.14 million copies in the first week, and debuted at the number-one position on the Oricon weekly album charts. [133] Hip hop bands such as Rip Slyme and Ketsumeishi were also at the top of the Oricon charts. Rock band Orange Range featured several elements of hip hop in their music. [134] Orange Range's album musiQ sold over 2.6 million copies, making it the number one album of 2005 on the Oricon charts. Pop/R&B singer Ken Hirai topped the Oricon yearly album chart in 2006 with the release of his greatest hits album 10th Anniversary Complete Single Collection '95-'05 Utabaka, selling over 2 million copies. The pop/hip-hop duo, Halcali , have the honor of being the first Japanese female hip-hop artists to break the Oricon top 10 charts. They have also performed overseas two times in 2008, once at the Anime Central festival in Chicago, and once more at Central Park , NYC on Japan Day. Exile , the dance-vocal group under Avex's sublabel Rhythm Zone , had several million-seller albums. Their album Exile Love topped the Oricon yearly album chart in 2008. Veteran rapper Dohzi-T collaborated with popular singers such as Shota Shimizu , Hiromi Go , Miliyah Kato , and Thelma Aoyama in his successful 2008 album 12 Love Stories . [135] Although there were only 132 new artists in Japan in 2001, according to the Recording Industry Association of Japan , the number increased to 512 in 2008. [136] In 2008, 14 new artists, such as Thelma Aoyama, attended the NHK Kōhaku Uta Gassen for the first time. [137] Popularity of live performances and veteran musicians[ edit ] See also: Fuji Rock Festival , Summer Sonic Festival , Rising Sun Rock Festival , and Rock in Japan Festival Green Stage of the Fuji Rock Festival Rock musicians such as Mr. Children , B'z , Southern All Stars , L'Arc-en-Ciel , and Glay still topped the charts in the first decade of the 21st century. Mr. Children's song " Sign " won the Grand Prix award at the 46th Japan Record Awards in 2004. When the group released their album Home in 2007, they passed 50 million albums and singles sold, making them the second-highest selling artist of all time in Japan since the origin of Oricon—just behind B'z, who held the number-one position with more than 75 million records sold until then. [138] Home topped the 2007 Oricon yearly album charts. The sales of physical CDs declined, but audiences to see live performances increased. [139] Eikichi Yazawa took part in rock festivals , and, in 2007, he became the first artist to have performed 100 concerts at the Nippon Budokan . [140] Other artists, such as Namie Amuro , also continued their long-running careers with successful releases in this period. Her live tour, Namie Amuro Best Fiction tour 2008-2009 , not only became the biggest live tour by a Japanese solo female artist—attended by 450,000 fans in Japan—but was also attended by 50,000 fans in Taiwan and Shanghai . [141] [142] While Kazumasa Oda 's 2005 album Sōkana topped the Oricon weekly album charts, his 2007 single "Kokoro" reached the weekly single charts, breaking Yujiro Ishihara 's record and making him the then-oldest singer to top the single charts. [143] Mariya Takeuchi 's greatest hits album Expressions topped the Oricon album chart in 2008, making her the oldest female singer with the longest active career to reach the number-one position. [144] Further information: Johnny & Associates and J Storm Johnny & Associates 's all-male groups remained well-known. In 2001, SMAP released their greatest-hits album SMAP Vest, which sold over a million copies in the first week. [145] In November 2001, Johnny & Associates established the label J Storm for their band Arashi . SMAP's 2003 single "Sekai ni hitotsu dake no hana" sold more than two million copies, being the number-one single in the Oricon yearly single charts for that year. In 2007, Guinness World Records honored KinKi Kids for holding a world record for the number of singles debuting at the number-one position since their debut: 25. [146] SMAP was said to fight a lonely battle at the Kōhaku Uta Gassen , as seen from the viewpoint of its audience share. [147] In 2008, male musicians established a record of four consecutive wins at the Kōhaku Uta Gassen. [148] Arashi's greatest hits album All the Best! 1999–2009 topped the 2009 Oricon yearly album charts. [149] Johnny & Associates also produced new groups such as Hey! Say! JUMP , Tackey & Tsubasa , NEWS , Kanjani Eight , and KAT-TUN . In 2006, KAT-TUN's debut single " Real Face ", written by Shikao Suga and composed by Tak Matsumoto , sold over one million copies and topped the Oricon Yearly Charts. [150] In 2007, temporary Johnny's Jr. group Hey! Say! 7 broke a record as the youngest male group to ever top Oricon charts, with an average age of 14.8 years. Later that year, Hey! Say! JUMP broke a record as the largest group to debut in Johnny's history, with ten members. They also became the youngest group ever to perform in Tokyo Dome with the average age of 15.7 years old. [151] On the 2008 yearly singles charts, only one single ranked in the top 30 was sung by a female (Namie Amuro's single " 60s 70s 80s ") except gender-mixed groups, partly because the boy bands enjoyed an advantage in physical single sales. [152] In 2009, Johnny's Jr. artist Yuma Nakayama w/B.I.Shadow became the youngest artist to have their first single to debut at the number-one spot, as the band had an average age of 14.6 years, breaking the former record set by female group Minimoni , 14.8 years. [153] Cover versions and classical pop[ edit ] In February 2001, Ulfuls released their cover version of Kyu Sakamoto 's 1963 song " Ashita Ga Arusa ". Their cover version debuted at the number-five position, behind Utada, Kinki Kids, Hamasaki and Hirai. [154] In March, Yoshimoto Kogyo 's special band "Re: Japan" also released their cover version of "Ashita Ga Arusa". When Ulfuls's cover version of this song remained at number eight, Re: Japan's version topped the Oricon weekly single charts. [155] In 2003, Man Arai released the single "Sen no Kaze ni Natte" ("As A Thousand Winds") based on the Western poem " Do not stand at my grave and weep ". In Japan, the poem was known for Rokusuke Ei 's reading at the funeral of Kyu Sakamoto in 1985. [156] Japanese tenor singer Masafumi Akikawa covered the song in 2006. Akikawa's cover version of the song became the first classical music single to top the Oricon charts, and sold over one million copies. [157] On the 2007 Oricon Yearly Charts, the single became the best-selling physical single, scoring a victory over Utada's "Flavor of Life". [157] Oricon claimed that the song was not J-pop. [158] On the other hand, sheet music from the Zen-On Music Company Ltd classified the song as J-pop. [159] Hideaki Tokunaga covered many female songs on his cover album series, Vocalist. He released Vocalist, Vocalist 2, Vocalist 3, Vocalist 4 and Vocalist Vintage (Vocalist 5) in 2005, 2006, 2007, 2010, and 2012 respectively. In August 2007, Vocalist 3 became Oricon weekly number-one cover album with 2 weeks (tied the record in Japan), and in May 2010, Vocalist 4 became the Japan first Oricon monthly number-one cover album. [160] In 2010, other singers also released cover albums of Japanese songs such as Juju 's Request and Kumi Koda's Eternity: Love & Songs . Superfly released a single that came with a cover album of Western rock songs, titled Wildflower & Cover Songs: Complete Best 'Track 3' , ultimately becoming the band's third consecutive album to debut at number one on the Oricon weekly album charts. [161] Influence from neofolk and neo Shibuya-kei[ edit ] See also: Shibuya-kei and Synthpop Folk duos, such as 19 , Yuzu and Kobukuro , became popular during the period. [162] Their music was called "neofolk". In October 2007, Kobukuro's double-album All Singles Best became the first male album to ship three million copies in the 21st century in Japan. [163] In January 2008, their album 5296 beat out Ayumi Hamasaki's album Guilty on the Oricon charts, though she previously had eight consecutive number-one studio albums. [164] Electronic music bands such as Plus-Tech Squeeze Box and Capsule were called " neo Shibuya-kei ". Yasutaka Nakata , a member of Capsule, became the song producer for girl group Perfume . [165] In April 2008, for the first time as a technopop band in 25 years since Yellow Magic Orchestra's 1983 album Naughty Boys , Perfume achieved a number-one album Game on the Oricon charts. In July 2008, their single " Love the World " debuted at number one, making it the first technopop song to reach number one in Oricon history. [166] Other Japanese female technopop artists soon followed, including Aira Mitsuki , immi , Mizca , SAWA , Saoriiiii , and Sweet Vacation . [167] Anime music, image song and Vocaloid[ edit ] Further information: Anime song , Image song , and Vocaloid During the late 2000s and the early 2010s, the anime music industry , such as voice actors and image songs , added weight to Japanese music. Though anime music was formerly influenced by J-pop and visual kei music, Japanese indie music apparently influenced the genre at the 2006 FanimeCon . [168] In 2007, after sampling voice actress Saki Fujita 's voice to develop it, Vocaloid Hatsune Miku was released, and many songs featuring Hatsune Miku were shown on the Nico Nico Douga . [169] Some of the musicians featuring Hatsune Miku, such as Livetune and Supercell , joined large record companies in Japan. Livetune released Re: Package on Victor Entertainment on August 27, 2008, [170] and Supercell released Supercell on Sony Music on March 4, 2009. [171] The albums Re: Package and Supercell were not brought under the control of the copyright system of the Japanese Society for Rights of Authors, Composers and Publishers (JASRAC), breaking the tradition that the musicians under the major labels affiliated with the system. [170] In June 2009, voice actress Nana Mizuki 's album Ultimate Diamond became the first voice actor album to reach number one on the Oricon weekly charts. [172] The fictional all female band Hōka-go Tea Time, from the anime series K-On! , released the mini-album Hōka-go Tea Time on July 22, 2009. The mini-album debuted at number one on the Oricon weekly album charts, becoming the first album by anime characters to reach number one. [173] In May 2010, Exit Tunes Presents Vocalogenesis feat. Hatsune Miku became the first album featuring Vocaloids to reach number one on the Oricon weekly charts, replacing Hideaki Tokunaga's Vocalist 4, which had topped the charts for four consecutive weeks. [174] 2010s: Popularity of idol groups[ edit ] AKB48 has occupied the top spot in the Oricon yearly single sales ranking every year since 2010. [175] Since the end of the 2000s, more and more idol groups have emerged. The high number of idol groups in the Japanese entertainment industry is sometimes called the "Warring Idols Period" (アイドル戦国時代, aidoru sengoku jidai), an allusion to the Sengoku-jidai . [176] Some of the most successful groups during the 2010s include Hey! Say! JUMP , AKB48 , Arashi , Kanjani Eight , Morning Musume , and Momoiro Clover Z . [177] [178] Kyary Pamyu Pamyu , a Harajuku-based fashion model, made her musical debut in 2011 and gained international popularity with her debut single " Pon Pon Pon ", recognized by some Western celebrities such as Katy Perry [179] and Ariana Grande . [180] She is produced by Yasutaka Nakata, who also produces the group Perfume. She subsequently gained success through her songs " Ninja Re Bang Bang " and " Fashion Monster ". During 2014, about 486,000 people attended Momoiro Clover Z 's live concerts, which was the highest recorded concert attendance for any female musician in Japan. [181] In 2019, AKB48 announced the postponement of its general election, [182] and  Arashi announced the group's hiatus. [183] Main article: List of J-pop artists Some Japanese pop artists are extremely popular in Japan, and some also have fanbases in other countries—especially in Asia, but also in Western countries. They influence not only music, but also fashion. As of 2016, the top five best-selling artists in the Japanese Oricon charts history are B'z , Mr. Children , Ayumi Hamasaki , Southern All Stars , and DREAMS COME TRUE . [138] Among the five, Hamasaki holds the record for being the only solo artist. [184]
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese popular music genre "CPOP" redirects here. Not to be confused with Center for Problem-Oriented Policing , Country pop , Cowboy pop , C-Pop (gallery) , or City pop . Li Jinhui , known as the father of Chinese pop C-pop is an abbreviation for Chinese popular music ( traditional Chinese : 漢語 流行 音樂 ; simplified Chinese : 汉语 流行 音乐 ; pinyin : hànyǔ liúxíng yīnyuè; Jyutping : hon3jyu5 lau4hang4 jam1ngok6), a loosely defined musical genre by artists originating from mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan (the Greater China region). This also includes countries where Chinese languages are used by parts of the population, such as Singapore and Malaysia. C-pop is used as an umbrella term covering not only Chinese pop but also R&B , ballads , Chinese rock , Chinese hip hop and Chinese ambient music, although Chinese rock diverged during the early 1990s. There are currently three main subgenres within C-pop: Cantopop , Mandopop and Hokkien pop . The gap between Cantopop and Mandopop has been narrowing in the new millennium. Hokkien pop, initially strongly influenced by Japanese enka , has been re-integrating into C-pop and narrowing its trend of development towards Mandopop. [ citation needed ] Chinese popular music in China was initially a vehicle for the Cultural Revolution and Maoist ideologies; however, during the country's extensive political and cultural changes of the past 50 years, it has lost much political significance; and now closely resembles the styles of Taiwanese Mandopop, Cantopop, K-pop and J-pop , from Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea, and Japan, respectively. [ citation needed ] Buck Clayton , the American who helped bring Jazz influence to Shanghai. For individual popstars and music era coverage, see Hokkien pop , Cantopop , and Mandopop . The term shidaiqu (meaning "music of the era" or "popular music") is used to describe all different types of music sung in Mandarin and other Chinese dialects recorded in China from 1920 to 1952, then in Hong Kong until the 1960s. Shanghai was the main hub of the Chinese popular music recording industry, and an important name of the period is composer Li Jinhui . Buck Clayton is credited with bringing American jazz influence to China and the music gained popularity in hangout quarters of nightclubs and dancehalls of major cities in the 1920s.  A number of privately run radio stations from the late 1920s to the 1950s played C-pop. [1] Around 1927, Li Jinhui composed "The Drizzle" ("毛毛雨") sung by his daughter Li Minghui (黎明暉), and this song is generally regarded as the first Chinese pop song. [2] [3] [4] It fuses jazz and Chinese folk music – the tune is in the style of a traditional pentatonic folk melody, but the instrumentation is similar to that of an American jazz orchestra . [5] Around the time of the Japanese invasion of Manchuria , and the Chinese Civil War , pop music was seen as a leftist undisturbed distraction.  After the Second Sino-Japanese War and World War II C-pop has been marketed, produced and branded regionally. The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) established the People's Republic of China in 1949.  One of its first actions was to label the genre " Yellow Music " (the color is associated with pornography). The Shanghai pop music industry then took pop music to Hong Kong and in the 1970s developed Cantopop . The Kuomintang , relocated to Taiwan, discouraged the use of native Taiwanese Hokkien dialect from the 1950s to the late 1980s. As a result, mandopop became the dominant musical genre in Taiwan. In 2000 EolAsia.com was founded as the first online C-pop music portal in Hong Kong. The company survived the dot-com bubble and offered online legal music downloads in February 2005, backed by EMI , Warner Music and Sony BMG . [6] It primarily targets consumers in Hong Kong and Macau : some songs require Hong Kong Identity Cards to purchase. In August 2008 Norman Cheung, father of HK singer Ronald Cheng , acquired the remaining portion of EMI Music Asia when EMI, which had entered China in the early 20th century, withdrew from the Chinese market. Typhoon music made the purchase for an estimated HK$ 100 million. [7] [8] In February 2008 mainland China 's top search engine Baidu.com was sued by local industry groups for providing music listening, broadcasting and downloading without approval. [9] Piracy continues to exist in China [10] but Google have since announced a cooperation deal offering free listening and genuine music copies. Top100.cn was founded by basketball star Yao Ming , agent Zhang Mingji and music insider Chen Ge via a 20 million yuan investment. [11] Google mp3 became available in March 2009. [12] The future of C-pop in mainland China is slowly emerging. However, the Chinese government 's banning of the highly popular show Super Girl for one year in 2008 and 2012 still a very controversial for the mainland China market. [13] In the early years of modern mainland China, emphasis on collectivist and party values, would predominantly set the theme for the music that was produced. Chinese officially sanctioned music schools, teaching popular music usually involves praising China's national culture through song lyrics that echo the official orientation of the PRC. The way in which popular music is taught in the school system relates to Chinese patriotic verses and traditional Chinese culture. The educational policy is heavily influenced by the government, and the "... Chinese government still uses traditional Chinese culture and values to enhance its legitimacy and consolidate its authority" [14] (Ho, 2012, p1). After the Cultural Revolution that isolated China from the rest of the world for more than a decade, the country opened up, especially under the leadership of premier Deng.  Global economic development offered all sorts of opportunities for Chinese businessmen and the opening up of east coast regions to outside economic interests served to boost significantly cross-cultural exchange between China and other nations, including the United States. Globalization and China's joining the World Trade Organization, with the implication of a move to make institutions within the country more compatible with those of the rest of the world, and the surge in international trade all contributed to bringing not only increased economic activity but also social exposure to foreign cultural standards.  Although the new openness affected relations with a broad range of foreign countries, the United States was especially important as it was a major trading partner, and globalization has helped both nations to develop a healthy relationship for future growth. The openness to trade and other exchanges with the United States, including the growing number of Chinese students seeking admission to educational establishments in the US, facilitated familiarity with American popular music . Although this was not the first exposure to foreign music for China, as there had been a growing awareness of the unique brand of western influenced popular music in Hong Kong, known as Cantopop, the influences of American rock , and African American rebellious hip hop and rap music were undoubtedly a lot more accepted by Chinese youth compared to their parent's generation. Nowadays mainland singers like Hua Chenyu, one of the most influential young pop-rock singers in China today, sold out an Olympic sized stadium concert in two minutes and 58 seconds, demonstrating the homegrown pop music of China are at the stage of strong mass appeal. [15] [16] (Rupke & Blank, 2009).  The globalization of popular music impacted other East Asian countries, especially Korea and Japan, and this in turn has influenced developments in China, as "pop-culture excursions between (the) three countries" [17] are deemed significant (Tricks, 2014, p. 4).
(Redirected from Bollywood ) Hindi-language film industry based in Mumbai, Maharashtra, India This article is about the Hindi film industry based in Mumbai, Maharashtra. For the entire film industry of India, see Cinema of India . "Bollywood" redirects here. For other uses, see Bollywood (disambiguation) . Hindi cinema Produced feature films (2022) [2] Total Gross box office (2022) [2] Total ₹2400 Cr (nett earning) This article contains Indic text . Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks or boxes , misplaced vowels or missing conjuncts instead of Indic text. Tulu (Coastalwood) Hindi cinema, popularly known as Bollywood and formerly as Bombay cinema, [3] refers to the film industry based in Mumbai , engaged in production of motion pictures in Hindi language. The popular term Bollywood is a portmanteau of "Bombay" (former name of Mumbai) and " Hollywood ". The industry is a part of the larger Indian cinema , which also includes South Indian cinema and other smaller film industries . [4] [5] [6] In 2017, Indian cinema produced 1,986 feature films, of which the largest number, 364 have been in Hindi. [4] As per data from 2014 [update] , Hindi cinema represented 43 percent of Indian net box-office revenue; Tamil and Telugu cinema represented 36 percent, and the remaining regional cinema constituted 21 percent. [7] Hindi cinema is one of the largest centres for film production in the world. [8] [9] [10] Hindi films sold an estimated 341 million tickets in India in 2019. [11] [12] Earlier Hindi films tended to use vernacular Hindustani , mutually intelligible by speakers of either Hindi or Urdu , while modern Hindi productions increasingly incorporate elements of Hinglish . [13] The most popular commercial genre in Hindi cinema since the 1970s has been the masala film , which freely mixes different genres including action , comedy , romance , drama and melodrama along with musical numbers . [14] [15] Masala films generally fall under the musical film genre, of which Indian cinema has been the largest producer since the 1960s when it exceeded the American film industry's total musical output after musical films declined in the West. Dadasaheb Phalke 's silent film Raja Harishchandra (1913) is the first feature length film made in India. [16] The first Indian musical talkie was Alam Ara (1931), four years after the first Hollywood sound film The Jazz Singer (1927). Alongside commercial masala films, a distinctive genre of art films known as parallel cinema has also existed, presenting realistic content and avoidance of musical numbers. In more recent years, the distinction between commercial masala and parallel cinema has been gradually blurring, with an increasing number of mainstream films adopting the conventions which were once strictly associated with parallel cinema. Etymology "Bollywood" is a portmanteau derived from Bombay (the former name of Mumbai ) and "Hollywood", a shorthand reference for the American film industry which is based in Hollywood , California . [17] The term "Tollywood", for the Tollygunge -based cinema of West Bengal , predated "Bollywood". [18] It was used in a 1932 American Cinematographer article by Wilford E. Deming, an American engineer who helped produce the first Indian sound picture. [18] "Bollywood" was probably invented in Bombay-based film trade journals in the 1960s or 1970s, though the exact inventor varies by account. [19] [20] Film journalist Bevinda Collaco claims she coined the term for the title of her column in Screen magazine. [21] Her column entitled "On the Bollywood Beat" covered studio news and celebrity gossip. [21] Other sources state that lyricist, filmmaker and scholar Amit Khanna was its creator. [22] It is unknown if it was derived from "Hollywood" through "Tollywood", or was inspired directly by "Hollywood". The term has been criticised by some film journalists and critics, who believe it implies that the industry is a poor cousin of Hollywood. [17] [23] Many noted Hindi film actors, directors prefer to call it Hindi cinema rather than Bollywood and advice others to mention it as 'Hindi cinema'. [24] [25] In 2020, Sudhir Mishra dissociated himself from Bollywood term, Hansal Mehta echoed same sentiment, he said "Bollywood" is "very derogatory " term for Hindi cinema, veteran director Shyam Benegal : "Bollywood is a term copied from Hollywood. The Indian film industry is the largest in the world. Why should we take a terminology that belongs to the industry of some other country?", Ketan Mehta always preferred calling it Hindi cinema, Anurag Basu said "Calling ourselves Bollywood is a feudal mindset, we have our own identity. We are Indian cinema, where films are made in more than 15 languages...We should not degrade by calling ourselves Bollywood. When I go to International film festivals, I feel ashamed when we are called Bollywood. There is Korean cinema, French cinema, Italian cinema... why not Indian cinema?" [26] Noted South Indian director Mani Ratnam expressed that 'Hindi cinema should stop calling itself Bollywood '. [27] Present SS Rajamouli's Baahubali: The Beginning (2015), Telugu language film started new wave of Pan-India films . Due to COVID-19 , the Hindi industry halted, many movies got delayed and released after pandemic ended, in the meanwhile due to years lockdowns audience got confined and got exposed to World cinema through number of OTT platforms such as Netflix , Prime video , Sony LIV etc who became popular, Indian audience not only watched Hollywood movies on them but also lots of movies of South Korean , Spanish etc film industries, and their web series. According to some film critics, the test and understanding of the audience evolved, they became more content driven, they began exploring various film genres . From 2015 onwards, the position of Bollywood as the top film industry of India waned. Some directors, exhibitors, actors and producers claimed that audiences became smarter, and they wanted movies with good stories, and they do not accept mediocre films. Instead of understanding it, Bollywood's film producers continued making films on cliched, bad stories, and did not evolve with their audience. Consequently, big-budget Bollywood films ended up as Box-office disasters in recent past. Since Bahubali (2015) released, many regional language movies emerged as hits throughout India and regional film industries such as Telugu, Tamil , Kannada Film Industry etc., started giving tough competition to the Bollywood movies at the box-office. Many regional actors became known outside their state, where previously they were unknown. Rajamouli's RRR (2021), Telugu film emerged as one of the highest grossing films of Indian cinema . Many Bollywood producers and directors acknowledge the might of regional film industries. Some trade experts and critics believe that audiences eventually will return to Bollywood. [28] [29] [30] [31] In 2022, Hindi industry released 44 movies; out of those, 4 emerged as hits and 40 flopped. [32] History Early history (1890s–1930s) In 1897, a film presentation by Professor Stevenson featured a stage show at Calcutta 's Star Theatre. With Stevenson's encouragement and camera, Hiralal Sen , an Indian photographer, made a film of scenes from that show, The Flower of Persia (1898). [33] The Wrestlers (1899) by H. S. Bhatavdekar showed a wrestling match at the Hanging Gardens in Bombay . [34] Dadasaheb Phalke is considered the father of Indian cinema, including Hindi cinema. [35] [36] [37] Dadasaheb Phalke 's silent Raja Harishchandra (1913) is the first feature film made in India. By the 1930s, the industry was producing over 200 films per year. [38] The first Indian sound film, Ardeshir Irani 's Alam Ara (1931), was commercially successful. [39] With a great demand for talkies and musicals, Hindustani cinema (as Hindi cinema was then known as) [40] and the other regional film industries quickly switched to sound films. Challenges and market expansion (1930s–1940s) The 1930s and 1940s were tumultuous times; India was buffeted by the Great Depression , World War II , the Indian independence movement , and the violence of the Partition . Although most early Bombay films were unabashedly escapist , a number of filmmakers tackled tough social issues or used the struggle for Indian independence as a backdrop for their films. [41] Irani made the first Hindi colour film, Kisan Kanya , in 1937. The following year, he made a colour version of Mother India . However, colour did not become a popular feature until the late 1950s. At this time, lavish romantic musicals and melodramas were cinematic staples. Number of Hindi movies released since 1930. A rapid expansion was seen from the mid-1940s. The decade of the 1940s saw an expansion of Bombay cinema's commercial market and its presence in the national consciousness. The year 1943 saw the arrival of Indian cinema's first 'blockbuster' offering, the movie Kismet , which grossed in excess of the important barrier of one crore (10 million) rupees, made on a budget of only two lakh (200,000) rupees. [42] The film tackled contemporary issues, especially those arising from the Indian Independence movement, and went on to become "the longest running hit of Indian cinema", a title it held till the 1970s. [43] Film personalities like Bimal Roy, Sahir Ludhianvi and Prithviraj Kapoor participated in the creation of a national movement against colonial rule in India, while simultaneously leveraging the popular political movement to increase their own visibility and popularity. [44] [45] Themes from the Independence Movement deeply influenced Bombay film directors, screen-play writers, and lyricists, who saw their films in the context of social reform and the problems of the common people. [46] Before the Partition, the Bombay film industry was closely linked to the Lahore film industry (now the Pakistani film industry also known as "Lollywood"); both produced films in Hindustani (also known as Hindi-Urdu), the lingua franca of northern and central India. [47] Another centre of Hindustani-language film production was the Bengal film industry in Calcutta , Bengal Presidency (now Kolkata, West Bengal ), which produced Hindustani-language films and local Bengali language films. [48] [49] Many actors, filmmakers and musicians from the Lahore industry migrated to the Bombay industry during the 1940s, including actors K. L. Saigal , Prithviraj Kapoor , Dilip Kumar and Dev Anand as well as playback singers Mohammed Rafi , Noorjahan and Shamshad Begum . Around the same time, filmmakers and actors from the Calcutta film industry began migrating to Bombay; as a result, Bombay became the center of Hindustani-language film production. [49] The 1947 partition of India divided the country into the Republic of India and Pakistan , which precipitated the migration of filmmaking talent from film production centres like Lahore and Calcutta , which bore the brunt of the partition violence. [47] [50] [49] This included actors, filmmakers and musicians from Bengal , Punjab (particularly the present-day Pakistani Punjab ), [47] and the North-West Frontier Province (present-day Khyber Pakhtunkhwa ). [51] These events further consolidated the Bombay film industry's position as the preeminent center for film production in India. Golden age (late 1940s–1960s) The period from the late 1940s to the early 1960s, after India's independence , is regarded by film historians as the Golden Age of Hindi cinema. [52] [53] [54] Some of the most critically acclaimed Hindi films of all time were produced during this time. Examples include Pyaasa (1957) and Kaagaz Ke Phool (1959), directed by Guru Dutt and written by Abrar Alvi ; Awaara (1951) and Shree 420 (1955), directed by Raj Kapoor and written by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas , and Aan (1952), directed by Mehboob Khan and starring Dilip Kumar . The films explored social themes, primarily dealing with working-class life in India (particularly urban life) in the first two examples. Awaara presented the city as both nightmare and dream, and Pyaasa critiqued the unreality of urban life. [55] Mehboob Khan 's Mother India (1957), a remake of his earlier Aurat (1940), was the first Indian film nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film ; it lost by a single vote. [56] Mother India defined conventional Hindi cinema for decades. [57] [58] [59] It spawned a genre of dacoit films , in turn defined by Gunga Jumna (1961). [60] Written and produced by Dilip Kumar, Gunga Jumna was a dacoit crime drama about two brothers on opposite sides of the law (a theme which became common in Indian films during the 1970s). [61] Some of the best-known epic films of Hindi cinema were also produced at this time, such as K. Asif 's Mughal-e-Azam (1960). [62] Other acclaimed mainstream Hindi filmmakers during this period included Kamal Amrohi and Vijay Bhatt . Nargis , Raj Kapoor and Dilip Kumar in Andaz (1949). Kapoor and Kumar are among the greatest and most influential movie stars in the history of Indian cinema, [63] [64] and Nargis is one of its greatest actresses. [65] The three most popular male Indian actors of the 1950s and 1960s were Dilip Kumar , Raj Kapoor , and Dev Anand , each with a unique acting style. Kapoor adopted Charlie Chaplin 's tramp persona; Anand modeled himself on suave Hollywood stars like Gregory Peck and Cary Grant , and Kumar pioneered a form of method acting which predated Hollywood method actors such as Marlon Brando . Kumar, who was described as "the ultimate method actor" by Satyajit Ray , inspired future generations of Indian actors. Much like Brando's influence on Robert De Niro and Al Pacino , Kumar had a similar influence on Amitabh Bachchan , Naseeruddin Shah , Shah Rukh Khan and Nawazuddin Siddiqui . [63] [64] Veteran actresses such as Suraiya , Nargis , Sumitra Devi , Madhubala , Meena Kumari , Waheeda Rehman , Nutan , Sadhana , Mala Sinha and Vyjayanthimala have had their share of influence on Hindi cinema. [66] While commercial Hindi cinema was thriving, the 1950s also saw the emergence of a parallel cinema movement. [55] Although the movement (emphasising social realism ) was led by Bengali cinema , it also began gaining prominence in Hindi cinema. Early examples of parallel cinema include Dharti Ke Lal (1946), directed by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas and based on the Bengal famine of 1943 ,; [67] Neecha Nagar (1946) directed by Chetan Anand and written by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas, [68] and Bimal Roy's Do Bigha Zamin (1953). Their critical acclaim and the latter's commercial success paved the way for Indian neorealism and the Indian New Wave (synonymous with parallel cinema). [69] Internationally acclaimed Hindi filmmakers involved in the movement included Mani Kaul , Kumar Shahani , Ketan Mehta , Govind Nihalani , Shyam Benegal , and Vijaya Mehta . [55] Rajesh Khanna in 2010. The first Indian actor to be called a " superstar ", he starred in 15 consecutive hit films from 1969 to 1971. After the social-realist film Neecha Nagar received the Palme d'Or at the inaugural 1946 Cannes Film Festival , [68] Hindi films were frequently in competition for Cannes' top prize during the 1950s and early 1960s and some won major prizes at the festival. [70] Guru Dutt , overlooked during his lifetime, received belated international recognition during the 1980s. [70] [71] Film critics polled by the British magazine Sight & Sound included several of Dutt's films in a 2002 list of greatest films , [72] and Time's All-Time 100 Movies lists Pyaasa as one of the greatest films of all time. [73] During the late 1960s and early 1970s, the industry was dominated by musical romance films with romantic-hero leads. [74] Classic Hindi cinema (1970s–1980s) The Salim–Javed screenwriting duo, consisting of Salim Khan (left) and Javed Akhtar , revolutionized Indian cinema in the 1970s [75] and are considered Hindi cinema's greatest screenwriters . [76] By 1970, Hindi cinema was thematically stagnant [77] and dominated by musical romance films . [74] The arrival of screenwriting duo Salim–Javed ( Salim Khan and Javed Akhtar ) was a paradigm shift, revitalising the industry. [77] They began the genre of gritty, violent, Bombay underworld crime films early in the decade with films such as Zanjeer (1973) and Deewaar (1975). [78] [79] Salim-Javed reinterpreted the rural themes of Mehboob Khan 's Mother India (1957) and Dilip Kumar 's Gunga Jumna (1961) in a contemporary urban context, reflecting the socio-economic and socio-political climate of 1970s India [77] [80] and channeling mass discontent, disillusionment [77] and the unprecedented growth of slums [81] with anti-establishment themes and those involving urban poverty, corruption and crime. [82] [83] Their "angry young man", personified by Amitabh Bachchan , [83] reinterpreted Dilip Kumar's performance in Gunga Jumna in a contemporary urban context [77] [80] and anguished urban poor. [81] By the mid-1970s, romantic confections had given way to gritty, violent crime films and action films about gangsters (the Bombay underworld ) and bandits ( dacoits ). Salim-Javed's writing and Amitabh Bachchan's acting popularised the trend with films such as Zanjeer and (particularly) Deewaar, a crime film inspired by Gunga Jumna [61] which pitted "a policeman against his brother, a gang leader based on real-life smuggler Haji Mastan " (Bachchan); according to Danny Boyle , Deewaar was "absolutely key to Indian cinema". [84] In addition to Bachchan, several other actors followed by riding the crest of the trend (which lasted into the early 1990s). [85] Actresses from the era include Hema Malini , Jaya Bachchan , Raakhee , Shabana Azmi , Zeenat Aman , Parveen Babi , Rekha , Dimple Kapadia , Smita Patil , Jaya Prada and Padmini Kolhapure . [66] Amitabh Bachchan in 2014. The name "Bollywood" was coined during the 1970s, [20] [21] when the conventions of commercial Hindi films were defined. [86] Key to this was the masala film , which combines a number of genres ( action , comedy , romance , drama , melodrama , and musical ). The masala film was pioneered early in the decade by filmmaker Nasir Hussain , [87] and the Salim-Javed screenwriting duo, [86] pioneering the Bollywood- blockbuster format. [86] Yaadon Ki Baarat (1973), directed by Hussain and written by Salim-Javed, has been identified as the first masala film and the first quintessentially "Bollywood" film. [86] [88] Salim-Javed wrote more successful masala films during the 1970s and 1980s. [86] Masala films made Amitabh Bachchan the biggest star of the period. A landmark of the genre was Amar Akbar Anthony (1977), [88] [89] directed by Manmohan Desai and written by Kader Khan , and Desai continued successfully exploiting the genre. Both genres (masala and violent-crime films) are represented by the blockbuster Sholay (1975), written by Salim-Javed and starring Amitabh Bachchan. It combined the dacoit film conventions of Mother India and Gunga Jumna with spaghetti Westerns , spawning the Dacoit Western (also known as the curry Western ) which was popular during the 1970s. [60] Some Hindi filmmakers, such as Shyam Benegal , Mani Kaul , Kumar Shahani , Ketan Mehta , Govind Nihalani and Vijaya Mehta , continued to produce realistic parallel cinema throughout the 1970s. [55] [90] Although the art film bent of the Film Finance Corporation was criticised during a 1976 Committee on Public Undertakings investigation which accused the corporation of not doing enough to encourage commercial cinema, the decade saw the rise of commercial cinema with films such as Sholay (1975) which consolidated Amitabh Bachchan 's position as a star. The devotional classic Jai Santoshi Ma was also released that year. [91] By 1983, the Bombay film industry was generating an estimated annual revenue of ₹700 crore (₹ 7 billion, [92] $693.14 million), [93] equivalent to $2.12 billion (₹12,667 crore, ₹ 111.33 billion) when adjusted for inflation. By 1986, India's annual film output had increased from 741 films produced annually to 833 films annually, making India the world's largest film producer. [94] The most internationally acclaimed Hindi film of the 1980s was Mira Nair 's Salaam Bombay! (1988), which won the Camera d'Or at the 1988 Cannes Film Festival and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film . New Hindi cinema (1990s–2020s) Shah Rukh Khan , one of the " Three Khans ", in 2012. Aamir Khan , one of the "Three Khans", in 2008. Hindi cinema experienced another period of box-office decline during the late 1980s with due to concerns by audiences over increasing violence and a decline in musical quality, and a rise in video piracy. One of the turning points came with such films as Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak (1988), presenting a blend of youthfulness, family entertainment, emotional intelligence and strong melodies, all of which lured audiences back to the big screen. [95] [96] It brought back the template for Bollywood musical romance films which went on to define 1990s Hindi cinema. [96] Known since the 1990s as "New Bollywood", [97] contemporary Bollywood is linked to economic liberalization in India during the early 1990s. [98] Early in the decade, the pendulum swung back toward family-centered romantic musicals. Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak (1988) was followed by blockbusters such as Maine Pyar Kiya (1989), Hum Aapke Hain Kaun (1994), Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge (1995), Raja Hindustani (1996), Dil To Pagal Hai (1997) and Kuch Kuch Hota Hai (1998), introducing a new generation of popular actors, including the three Khans : Aamir Khan , Shah Rukh Khan , and Salman Khan , [99] [100] who have starred in most of the top ten highest-grossing Bollywood films . The Khans and have had successful careers since the late 1980s and early 1990s, [99] and have dominated the Indian box office for three decades. [101] [102] Shah Rukh Khan was the most successful Indian actor for most of the 1990s and 2000s, and Aamir Khan has been the most successful Indian actor since the mid 2000s. [66] [103] Action and comedy films, starring such actors as Akshay Kumar and Govinda . [104] [105] The decade marked the entrance of new performers in art and independent films, some of which were commercially successful. The most influential example was Satya (1998), directed by Ram Gopal Varma and written by Anurag Kashyap . Its critical and commercial success led to the emergence of a genre known as Mumbai noir: [106] urban films reflecting the city's social problems. [107] This led to a resurgence of parallel cinema by the end of the decade. [106] The films featured actors whose performances were often praised by critics. Salman Khan , one of the Three Khans, with Bollywood actresses (from left) Kareena Kapoor , Rani Mukerji , Preity Zinta , Katrina Kaif , Karisma Kapoor and Priyanka Chopra in Mumbai (2010). The 2000s saw increased Bollywood recognition worldwide due to growing (and prospering) NRI and South Asian diaspora communities overseas. The growth of the Indian economy and a demand for quality entertainment in this era led the country's film industry to new heights in production values, cinematography and screenwriting as well as technical advances in areas such as special effects and animation. [108] Some of the largest production houses, among them Yash Raj Films and Dharma Productions were the producers of new modern films. [108] Some popular films of the decade were Kaho Naa... Pyaar Hai (2000), Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham... (2001), Gadar: Ek Prem Katha (2001), Lagaan (2001), Koi... Mil Gaya (2003), Kal Ho Naa Ho (2003), Veer-Zaara (2004), Rang De Basanti (2006), Lage Raho Munna Bhai (2006), Dhoom 2 (2006), Krrish (2006), and Jab We Met (2007), among others, showing the rise of new movie stars. During the 2010s, the industry saw established stars such as making big-budget masala films like Dabangg (2010), Singham (2011), Ek Tha Tiger (2012), Son of Sardaar (2012), Rowdy Rathore (2012), Chennai Express (2013), Kick (2014) and Happy New Year (2014) with much-younger actresses. Although the films were often not praised by critics, they were commercially successful. Some of the films starring Aamir Khan, from Taare Zameen Par (2007) and 3 Idiots (2009) to Dangal (2016) and Secret Superstar (2018), have been credited with redefining and modernising the masala film with a distinct brand of socially conscious cinema. [109] [110] Most stars from the 2000s continued successful careers into the next decade,[ citation needed ] and the 2010s saw a new generation of popular actors in different films. Among new conventions, female-centred films such as The Dirty Picture (2011), Kahaani (2012), and Queen (2014), Pink (2016), Raazi (2018), Gangubai Kathiawadi (2022) started gaining wide financial success.[ citation needed ] Influences on Hindi cinema Moti Gokulsing and Wimal Dissanayake identify six major influences which have shaped Indian popular cinema: [111] The branching structures of ancient Indian epics , like the Mahabharata and Ramayana . Indian popular films often have plots which branch off into sub-plots. Ancient Sanskrit drama , with its stylised nature and emphasis on spectacle in which music , dance and gesture combine "to create a vibrant artistic unit with dance and mime being central to the dramatic experience." Matthew Jones of De Montfort University also identifies the Sanskrit concept of rasa , or "the emotions felt by the audience as a result of the actor's presentation", as crucial to Bollywood films. [112] Traditional folk theater , which became popular around the 10th century with the decline of Sanskrit theater. Its regional traditions include the Jatra of Bengal , the Ramlila of Uttar Pradesh , and the Terukkuttu of Tamil Nadu . Parsi theatre , which "blended realism and fantasy, music and dance, narrative and spectacle, earthy dialogue and ingenuity of stage presentation, integrating them into a dramatic discourse of melodrama . The Parsi plays contained crude humour, melodious songs and music, sensationalism and dazzling stagecraft." Hollywood , where musicals were popular from the 1920s to the 1950s. Western musical television (particularly MTV ), which has had an increasing influence since the 1990s. Its pace, camera angles, dance sequences and music may be seen in 2000s Indian films. An early example of this approach was Mani Ratnam 's Bombay (1995). Sharmistha Gooptu identifies Indo-Persian - Islamic culture as a major influence. During the early 20th century, Urdu was the lingua franca of popular cultural performance across northern India and established in popular performance art traditions such as nautch dancing, Urdu poetry , and Parsi theater. Urdu and related Hindi dialects were the most widely understood across northern India, and Hindustani became the standard language of early Indian talkies. Films based on " Persianate adventure-romances" led to a popular genre of " Arabian Nights cinema". [113] Scholars Chaudhuri Diptakirti and Rachel Dwyer and screenwriter Javed Akhtar identify Urdu literature as a major influence on Hindi cinema. [114] [115] [116] Most of the screenwriters and scriptwriters of classic Hindi cinema came from Urdu literary backgrounds, [114] [115] [117] from Khwaja Ahmad Abbas and Akhtar ul Iman to Salim–Javed and Rahi Masoom Raza ; a handful came from other Indian literary traditions, such as Bengali and Hindi literature . [115] Most of Hindi cinema's classic scriptwriters wrote primarily in Urdu, including Salim-Javed, Gulzar , Rajinder Singh Bedi , Inder Raj Anand , Rahi Masoom Raza and Wajahat Mirza . [114] [117] Urdu poetry and the ghazal tradition strongly influenced filmi ( Bollywood lyrics ). [114] [116] Javed Akhtar was also greatly influenced by Urdu novels by Pakistani author Ibn-e-Safi , such as the Jasoosi Dunya and Imran series of detective novels; [118] they inspired, for example, famous Bollywood characters such as Gabbar Singh in Sholay (1975) and Mogambo in Mr. India (1987). [119] In recent times, accusations have been made against Bollywood of being anti-Hindu and promoting Urdu too much, to the extent of transforming into " Urduwood "; boycotts against Bollywood have been launched by Hindu nationalists on this point. [120] Todd Stadtman identifies several foreign influences on 1970s commercial Bollywood masala films , including New Hollywood , Italian exploitation films , and Hong Kong martial arts cinema . [85] After the success of Bruce Lee films (such as Enter the Dragon ) in India, [121] Deewaar (1975) and other Bollywood films incorporated fight scenes inspired by 1970s martial arts films from Hong Kong cinema until the 1990s. [122] Bollywood action scenes emulated Hong Kong rather than Hollywood, emphasising acrobatics and stunts and combining kung fu (as perceived by Indians) with Indian martial arts such as pehlwani . [123] Influence of Hindi cinema India Perhaps Hindi cinema's greatest influence has been on India's national identity, where (with the rest of Indian cinema) it has become part of the "Indian story". [124] In India, Bollywood is often associated with India's national identity. According to economist and Bollywood biographer Meghnad Desai , "Cinema actually has been the most vibrant medium for telling India its own story, the story of its struggle for independence, its constant struggle to achieve national integration and to emerge as a global presence". [124] Scholar Brigitte Schulze has written that Indian films, most notably Mehboob Khan 's Mother India (1957), played a key role in shaping the Republic of India 's national identity in the early years after independence from the British Raj ; the film conveyed a sense of Indian nationalism to urban and rural citizens alike. [125] Bollywood has long influenced Indian society and culture as the biggest entertainment industry; many of the country's musical, dancing, wedding and fashion trends are Bollywood-inspired. Bollywood fashion trendsetters have included Madhubala in Mughal-e-Azam (1960) and Madhuri Dixit in Hum Aapke Hain Koun..! (1994). [99] Hindi films have also had a socio-political impact on Indian society, reflecting Indian politics . [126] In classic 1970s Bollywood films, Bombay underworld crime films written by Salim–Javed and starring Amitabh Bachchan such as Zanjeer (1973) and Deewaar (1975) reflected the socio-economic and socio-political realities of contemporary India. They channeled growing popular discontent and disillusionment and state failure to ensure welfare and well-being at a time of inflation, shortages, loss of confidence in public institutions, increasing crime [77] and the unprecedented growth of slums . [81] Salim-Javed and Bachchan's films dealt with urban poverty, corruption and organised crime; [82] they were perceived by audiences as anti-establishment , often with an "angry young man" protagonist presented as a vigilante or anti-hero [83] whose suppressed rage voiced the anguish of the urban poor. [81] Overseas Hindi films have been a significant form of soft power for India, increasing its influence and changing overseas perceptions of India. [127] [128] In Germany , Indian stereotypes included bullock carts , beggars, sacred cows, corrupt politicians, and catastrophes before Bollywood and the IT industry transformed global perceptions of India. [129] According to author Roopa Swaminathan, "Bollywood cinema is one of the strongest global cultural ambassadors of a new India." [128] [130] Its role in expanding India's global influence is comparable to Hollywood's similar role with American influence. [99] Monroe Township , Middlesex County , New Jersey , in the New York metropolitan area , has been profoundly impacted by Bollywood; this U.S. township has displayed one of the fastest growth rates of its Indian population in the Western Hemisphere , increasing from 256 (0.9%) as of the 2000 Census [131] to an estimated 5,943 (13.6%) as of 2017, [132] representing a 2,221.5% (a multiple of 23) numerical increase over that period, including many affluent professionals and senior citizens as well as charitable benefactors to the COVID-19 relief efforts in India in official coordination with Monroe Township, as well as actors with second homes. During the 2000s, Hindi cinema began influencing musical films in the Western world and was instrumental role in reviving the American musical film. Baz Luhrmann said that his musical film, Moulin Rouge! (2001), was inspired by Bollywood musicals; [133] the film incorporated a Bollywood-style dance scene with a song from the film China Gate . The critical and financial success of Moulin Rouge! began a renaissance of Western musical films such as Chicago , Rent , and Dreamgirls . [134] The Kronos Quartet re-recorded several R. D. Burman compositions sung by Asha Bhosle for their 2005 album, You've Stolen My Heart: Songs from R.D. Burman's Bollywood , which was nominated for Best Contemporary World Music Album at the 2006 Grammy Awards. Filmi music composed by A. R. Rahman (who received two Academy Awards for the Slumdog Millionaire soundtrack ) has frequently been sampled by other musicians, including the Singaporean artist Kelly Poon , the French rap group La Caution and the American artist Ciara . Many Asian Underground artists, particularly those among the overseas Indian diaspora , have also been inspired by Bollywood music. [146] Genres See also: Muslim social and Masala film Melodrama and romance are common ingredients in Bollywood films, such as Achhut Kanya (1936). Hindi films are primarily musicals, and are expected to have catchy song-and-dance numbers woven into the script. A film's success often depends on the quality of such musical numbers. [147] A film's music and song and dance portions are usually produced first and these are often released before the film itself, increasing its audience. [148] Indian audiences expect value for money, and a good film is generally referred to as paisa vasool, (literally "money's worth"). [149] Songs, dances, love triangles, comedy and dare-devil thrills are combined in a three-hour show (with an intermission). These are called masala films , after the Hindi word for a spice mixture. Like masalas, they are a mixture of action, comedy and romance; most have heroes who can fight off villains single-handedly. Bollywood plots have tended to be melodramatic , frequently using formulaic ingredients such as star-crossed lovers, angry parents, love triangles, family ties, sacrifice, political corruption, kidnapping, villains, kind-hearted courtesans , long-lost relatives and siblings, reversals of fortune and serendipity . Parallel cinema films tended to be less popular at the box office. A large Indian diaspora in English-speaking countries and increased Western influence in India have nudged Bollywood films closer to Hollywood. [150] According to film critic Lata Khubchandani, "Our earliest films ... had liberal doses of sex and kissing scenes in them. Strangely, it was after Independence the censor board came into being and so did all the strictures." [151] Although Bollywood plots feature Westernised urbanites dating and dancing in clubs rather than pre-arranged marriages, traditional Indian culture continues to exist outside the industry and is an element of resistance by some to Western influences. [150] Bollywood plays a major role, however, in Indian fashion . [150] Studies have indicated that some people, unaware that changing fashion in Bollywood films is often influenced by globalisation, consider the clothes worn by Bollywood actors as authentically Indian. [150] Casts and crews See also: List of Indian film actors , List of Indian film actresses , List of Indian film directors , List of Indian film music directors , List of Hindi film actors , List of Indian playback singers , and List of Hindi film families Bollywood employs people from throughout India. It attracts thousands of aspiring actors hoping for a break in the industry. Models and beauty contestants, television actors, stage actors and ordinary people come to Mumbai with the hope of becoming a star. As in Hollywood, very few succeed. Since many Bollywood films are shot abroad, many foreign extras are employed. [152] In Bollywood producers pay minimal amount, low wages to the writers. [153] Very few non-Indian actors are able to make a mark in Hindi cinema, although many have tried. Since the early decades of the industry, many South Indian actresses debuted in the Bombay industry and became mainstream Bollywood stars, including Vyjayanthimala , Hema Malini , Rekha , and Sridevi . A number of foreign actresses became successful in spite of their ignorance of the Hindi language. Hindi cinema can be insular, and relatives of film-industry figures have an edge in obtaining coveted roles in films or being part of a film crew. However, industry connections are no guarantee of a long career: competition is fierce, and film-industry scions will falter if they do not succeed at the box office. A few Hindi filmmakers regularly got criticised for allegedly practising nepotism. Critics and fans accused them of hindering the careers of outsiders (potential artists who do not have any connections in the industry) and readily giving roles to promote the kids of established actors, directors and producers. Criticism targeted the big production houses (e.g. Yash Raj Films ) for their tendency to work with actors who are from their social circles. [154] Moreover, the problem of casting couch has been mentioned in reference to the Hindi film industry, and received stronger notice during the MenToo movement . [155] [156] Scripts, dialogues, and lyrics See also: Bombay Hindi and Tapori (word) In Hindi films, scripts, dialogues and song lyrics might be written by different people. Earlier, scripts were usually written in an unadorned Hindustani , which would be understood by the largest possible audience. [157] Post-Independence, Hindi films tended to use a colloquial register of Hindustani, mutually intelligible by Hindi and Urdu speakers, but the use of the latter has declined over years. [13] [158] Some films have used regional dialects to evoke a village setting, or archaic Urdu in medieval historical films . A number of the dominant early scriptwriters of Hindi cinema primarily wrote in Urdu; Salim-Javed wrote in Urdu script , which was then transcribed by an assistant into Devanagari script so Hindi readers could read them. [114] During the 1970s, Urdu writers Krishan Chander and Ismat Chughtai said that "more than seventy-five per cent of films are made in Urdu" but were categorised as Hindi films by the government. [159] Encyclopedia of Hindi Cinema noted a number of top Urdu writers for preserving the language through film. [160] Urdu poetry has strongly influenced Hindi film songs , whose lyrics also draw from the ghazal tradition ( filmi-ghazal ). [116] According to Javed Akhtar in 1996, despite the loss of Urdu in Indian society, Urdu diction dominated Hindi film dialogue and lyrics. [161] In her book, The Cinematic ImagiNation, Jyotika Virdi wrote about the presence and decline of Urdu in Hindi films. Virdi notes that although Urdu was widely used in classic Hindi cinema decades after partition because it was widely taught in pre- partition India, its use has declined in modern Hindi cinema: "The extent of Urdu used in commercial Hindi cinema has not been stable ... the ultimate victory of Hindi in the official sphere has been more or less complete. This decline of Urdu is mirrored in Hindi films ... It is true that many Urdu words have survived and have become part of Hindi cinema's popular vocabulary. But that is as far as it goes. The fact is, for the most part, popular Hindi cinema has forsaken the florid Urdu that was part of its extravagance and retained a 'residual' Urdu", affected by an aggressive state policy that promoted a Sanskritized version of Hindi as the national language." [162] Contemporary mainstream films also use English; according to the article "Bollywood Audiences Editorial", "English has begun to challenge the ideological work done by Urdu." [13] [163] Some film scripts are first written in Latin script . [164] Characters may shift from one language to the other to evoke a particular atmosphere (for example, English in a business setting and Hindi in an informal one). The blend of Hindi and English sometimes heard in modern Hindi films, known as Hinglish , has become increasingly common. [158] For years before the turn of the millennium and even after, cinematic language (in dialogues or lyrics) would often be melodramatic, invoking God, family, mother, duty, and self-sacrifice. Song lyrics are often about love and, especially in older films, frequently used the poetic vocabulary of court Urdu, with a number of Persian loanwords. [14] Another source for love lyrics in films such as Jhanak Jhanak Payal Baje and Lagaan is the long Hindu tradition of poetry about the loves of Krishna , Radha , and the gopis . Music directors often prefer working with certain lyricists, and the lyricist and composer may be seen as a team. This phenomenon has been compared to the pairs of American composers and songwriters who created classic Broadway musicals. In 2008 and before, Bollywood scripts were often handwritten because, in the industry, there is a perception that manual writing is the quickest way to create scripts. [165] Sound This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2019) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Sound in early Bollywood films was usually not recorded on location ( sync sound ). It was usually created (or re-created) in the studio, [166] with the actors speaking their lines in the studio and sound effects added later; this created synchronisation problems. [166] Commercial Indian films are known for their lack of ambient sound, and the Arriflex 3 camera necessitated dubbing. Lagaan (2001) was filmed with sync sound, [166] and several Bollywood films have recorded on-location sound since then. Bollywood films are also notorious for lack or less of Foley sound , due to which most of the times audience don't experience all the sounds from objects on screen. Sometimes lound background music makes dialogues inaudible. Usually Hindi film's makers do not write Foley artist's name in end credits. Female makeup artists In 1955, the Bollywood Cine Costume Make-Up Artist & Hair Dressers' Association (CCMAA) ruled that female makeup artists were barred from membership. [167] The Supreme Court of India ruled in 2014 that the ban violated Indian constitutional guarantees under Article 14 (right to equality), 19(1)(g) (freedom to work) and Article 21 (right to liberty). [167] According to the court, the ban had no "rationale nexus" to the cause sought to be achieved and was "unacceptable, impermissible and inconsistent" with the constitutional rights guaranteed to India's citizens. [167] The court also found illegal the rule which mandated that for any artist to work in the industry, they must have lived for five years in the state where they intend to work. [167] In 2015, it was announced that Charu Khurana was the first woman registered by the Cine Costume Make-Up Artist & Hair Dressers' Association. [168] Song and dance Group of Bollywood singers at the 2015 Indian Singers' Rights Association (ISRA) meeting Bollywood dance performance by students in college. See also: Hindi film music , Filmi-ghazal , Filmi qawwali , Hindi dance music , and List of singing actors in Indian cinema Bollywood film music is called filmi (from the Hindi "of films"). Bollywood songs were introduced with Ardeshir Irani's Alam Ara (1931) song, "De De Khuda Ke Naam pay pyaare". [169] Bollywood songs are generally pre-recorded by professional playback singers, with the actors then lip syncing the words to the song on-screen (often while dancing). Although most actors are good dancers, few are also singers; a notable exception was Kishore Kumar , who starred in several major films during the 1950s while having a rewarding career as a playback singer. K. L. Saigal , Suraiyya, and Noor Jehan were known as singers and actors, and some actors in the last thirty years have sung one or more songs themselves. Songs can make and break a film, determining whether it will be a flop or a hit: "Few films without successful musical tracks, and even fewer without any songs and dances, succeed". [170] Globalization has changed Bollywood music, with lyrics an increasing mix of Hindi and English. Global trends such as salsa, pop and hip hop have influenced the music heard in Bollywood films. [170] Playback singers are featured in the opening credits, and have fans who will see an otherwise-lackluster film to hear their favourites. Notable singers are Lata Mangeshkar , Asha Bhosle , Geeta Dutt , Shamshad Begum , Kavita Krishnamurthy , Sadhana Sargam , Alka Yagnik and Shreya Goshal (female), and K. L. Saigal, Kishore Kumar , Talat Mahmood, Mukesh , Mohammed Rafi , Manna Dey , Hemant Kumar , Kumar Sanu , Udit Narayan and Sonu Nigam (male). Composers of film music, known as music directors, are also well-known. Remixing of film songs with modern rhythms is common, and producers may release remixed versions of some of their films' songs with the films' soundtrack albums. Dancing in Bollywood films, especially older films, is modeled on Indian dance: classical dance, dances of north-Indian courtesans ( tawaif ) or folk dances . In modern films, Indian dance blends with Western dance styles as seen on MTV or in Broadway musicals; Western pop and classical-dance numbers are commonly seen side-by-side in the same film. The hero (or heroine) often performs with a troupe of supporting dancers. Many song-and-dance routines in Indian films contain unrealistically-quick shifts of location or changes of costume between verses of a song. If the hero and heroine dance and sing a duet, it is often staged in natural surroundings or architecturally-grand settings. Songs typically comment on the action taking place in the film. A song may be worked into the plot, so a character has a reason to sing. It may externalise a character's thoughts, or presage an event in the film (such as two characters falling in love). The songs are often referred to as a "dream sequence", with things happening which would not normally happen in the real world. Song and dance scenes were often filmed in Kashmir but, due to political unrest in Kashmir since the end of the 1980s, [171] they have been shot in western Europe (particularly Switzerland and Austria ). [172] [173] Contemporary movie stars attracted popularity as dancers, including Madhuri Dixit , Hrithik Roshan , Aishwarya Rai Bachchan , Sridevi , Meenakshi Seshadri , Malaika Arora Khan , Shahid Kapoor , Katrina Kaif and Tiger Shroff . Older dancers include Helen [174] (known for her cabaret numbers), Madhubala , Vyjanthimala , Padmini , Hema Malini , Mumtaz , Cuckoo Moray , [175] Parveen Babi [176] , Waheeda Rahman , [177] Meena Kumari , [178] and Shammi Kapoor . [179] Film producers have been releasing soundtracks (as tapes or CDs) before a film's release, hoping that the music will attract audiences; a soundtrack is often more popular than its film. Some producers also release music videos, usually (but not always) with a song from the film. Finances Bollywood films are multi-million dollar productions, with the most expensive productions costing up to ₹ 1 billion (about US$20 million). The science-fiction film Ra.One was made on a budget of ₹ 1.35 billion (about $27 million), making it the most expensive Bollywood film of all time. [180] Sets , costumes, special effects and cinematography were less than world-class, with some notable exceptions, until the mid-to-late 1990s. As Western films and television are more widely distributed in India, there is increased pressure for Bollywood films to reach the same production levels (particularly in action and special effects). Recent Bollywood films, like Krrish (2006), have employed international technicians such as Hong Kong-based action choreographer Tony Ching . The increasing accessibility of professional action and special effects, coupled with rising film budgets, have seen an increase in action and science-fiction films. Since overseas scenes are attractive at the box office, Mumbai film crews are filming in Australia, Canada, New Zealand , the United Kingdom, the United States, Europe and elsewhere. Indian producers have also obtained funding for big-budget films shot in India, such as Lagaan and Devdas . Funding for Bollywood films often comes from private distributors and a few large studios . Although Indian banks and financial institutions had been forbidden from lending to film studios, the ban has been lifted. [181] Finances are not regulated; some funding comes from illegitimate sources such as the Mumbai underworld, which is known to influence several prominent film personalities. Mumbai organised-crime hitmen shot Rakesh Roshan , a film director and father of star Hrithik Roshan , in January 2000. In 2001, the Central Bureau of Investigation seized all prints of Chori Chori Chupke Chupke after the film was found to be funded by members of the Mumbai underworld. [182] Another problem facing Bollywood is widespread copyright infringement of its films. Often, bootleg DVD copies of movies are available before they are released in cinemas. Manufacturing of bootleg DVD, VCD, and VHS copies of the latest movie titles is an established small-scale industry in parts of south and southeast Asia . The Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) estimates that the Bollywood industry loses $100 million annually from unlicensed home videos and DVDs. In addition to the homegrown market, demand for these copies is large amongst portions of the Indian diaspora . Bootleg copies are the only way people in Pakistan can watch Bollywood movies, since the Pakistani government has banned their sale, distribution and telecast. Films are frequently broadcast without compensation by small cable-TV companies in India and other parts of South Asia. Small convenience stores, run by members of the Indian diaspora in the US and the UK, regularly stock tapes and DVDs of dubious provenance; consumer copying adds to the problem. The availability of illegal copies of movies on the Internet also contributes to industry losses. Satellite TV, television and imported foreign films are making inroads into the domestic Indian entertainment market. In the past, most Bollywood films could make money; now, fewer do. Most Bollywood producers make money, however, recouping their investments from many sources of revenue (including the sale of ancillary rights). There are increasing returns from theatres in Western countries like the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States, where Bollywood is slowly being noticed. As more Indians migrate to these countries, they form a growing market for upscale Indian films. In 2002, Bollywood sold 3.6 billion tickets and had a total revenue (including theatre tickets, DVDs and television) of $1.3 billion; Hollywood films sold 2.6 billion tickets, and had a total revenue of $51 billion. Advertising A number of Indian artists hand-painted movie billboards and posters. M. F. Husain painted film posters early in his career; human labour was found to be cheaper than printing and distributing publicity material. [183] Most of the large, ubiquitous billboards in India's major cities are now created with computer-printed vinyl. Old hand-painted posters, once considered ephemera , are collectible folk art . [183] [184] [185] [186] Releasing film music, or music videos, before a film's release may be considered a form of advertising. A popular tune is believed to help attract audiences. [187] Bollywood publicists use the Internet as a venue for advertising. Most bigger-budget films have a websites on which audiences can view trailers, stills and information on the story, cast, and crew. [188] Bollywood is also used to advertise other products. Product placement , used in Hollywood, is also common in Bollywood. [189] International filming See also: Indian cinema and Switzerland Bollywood's increasing use of international settings such as Switzerland, London, Paris, New York, Mexico, Brazil and Singapore does not necessarily represent the people and cultures of those locales. Contrary to these spaces and geographies being filmed as they are, they are actually Indianised by adding Bollywood actors and Hindi speaking extras to them. While immersing in Bollywood films, viewers get to see their local experiences duplicated in different locations around the world. According to Shakuntala Rao, "Media representation can depict India's shifting relation with the world economy, but must retain its 'Indianness' in moments of dynamic hybridity"; [170] "Indianness" (cultural identity) poses a problem with Bollywood's popularity among varied diaspora audiences, but gives its domestic audience a sense of uniqueness from other immigrant groups. [190] Distribution To release their film theatrically or online in the country, every film maker first apply for film certification to the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) along film print , only after receiving CBFC certificate a film trailer or a film can be released in India, members of CBFC view the film, give rating–age restriction, suggest cuts on objectionable scenes or can ban the film from exhibition in anywhere in the country. [191] Film distribution in an important part in the movie business, through film distribution circuit Hindi movies get distributed in India. PVR Cinemas , INOX Leisure etc. are some top multiplexes chains in India, which have cinemas across the nation and exhibit films. Book My Show is the leading tickets selling mobile android application in India, it has tie-up with many such multiplexes. Although PVR and INOX also sell tickets through their application- websites. Due to the convince in tickets booking online most of the viewers pre-book tickets through mobile application. Since advancement of internet service in the country online ticket selling business having robust growth here. [192] [193] 2010 decade onward online platform gained popularity in the nation thus Many film-makers many time prefer to release their films online on one of the paid app : Netflix , Amazon Prime , SonyLIV , ZEE5 , Disney+ Hotstar etc. and avoiding theatrical release. [194] Awards The Filmfare Awards are some of the most prominent awards given to Hindi films in India. [195] The Indian screen magazine Filmfare began the awards in 1954 (recognising the best films of 1953), and they were originally known as the Clare Awards after the magazine's editor. Modeled on the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences ' poll-based merit format, individuals may vote in separate categories. A dual voting system was developed in 1956. [196] The National Film Awards were also introduced in 1954. The Indian government has sponsored the awards, given by its Directorate of Film Festivals (DFF), since 1973. The DFF screens Bollywood films, films from the other regional movie industries, and independent/art films. The awards are made at an annual ceremony presided over by the president of India. Unlike the Filmfare Awards, which are chosen by the public and a committee of experts, the National Film Awards are decided by a government panel. [197] Other awards ceremonies for Hindi films in India are the Screen Awards (begun in 1995) and the Stardust Awards , which began in 2003. The International Indian Film Academy Awards (begun in 2000) and the Zee Cine Awards , begun in 1998, are held abroad in a different country each year. Global markets See also: List of highest-grossing Indian films in overseas markets and List of highest-grossing Indian films In addition to their popularity among the Indian diaspora from Nigeria and Senegal to Egypt and Russia , generations of non-Indians have grown up with Bollywood. [198] Indian cinema's early contacts with other regions made inroads into the Soviet Union , the Middle East , Southeast Asia , [199] and China .[ citation needed ] Bollywood entered the consciousness of Western audiences and producers during the late 20th century, [108] [200] and Western actors now seek roles in Bollywood films. [201] Asia-Pacific South Asia Bollywood films are also popular in Pakistan, Bangladesh , and Nepal , where Hindustani is widely understood. Many Pakistanis understand Hindi, due to its linguistic similarity to Urdu . [202] Although Pakistan banned the import of Bollywood films in 1965, trade in unlicensed DVDs [203] and illegal cable broadcasts ensured their continued popularity. Exceptions to the ban were made for a few films, such as the colourised re-release of Mughal-e-Azam and Taj Mahal in 2006. Early in 2008, the Pakistani government permitted the import of 16 films. [204] More easing followed in 2009 and 2010. Although it is opposed by nationalists and representatives of Pakistan's small film industry, it is embraced by cinema owners who are making a profit after years of low receipts. [205] The most popular actors in Pakistan are the three Khans of Bollywood : Salman , Shah Rukh , and Aamir . The most popular actress is Madhuri Dixit ; [206] at India-Pakistan cricket matches during the 1990s, Pakistani fans chanted "Madhuri dedo, Kashmir lelo!" ("Give Madhuri, take Kashmir !") [207] Bollywood films in Nepal earn more than Nepali films , and Salman Khan, Akshay Kumar and Shah Rukh Khan are popular in the country. The films are also popular in Afghanistan due to its proximity to the Indian subcontinent and their cultural similarities, particularly in music. Popular actors include Shah Rukh Khan, Ajay Devgan , Sunny Deol , Aishwarya Rai , Preity Zinta , and Madhuri Dixit. [208] A number of Bollywood films were filmed in Afghanistan and some dealt with the country, including Dharmatma , Kabul Express , Khuda Gawah and Escape From Taliban . [209] [210] Southeast Asia Bollywood films are popular in Southeast Asia , particularly in maritime Southeast Asia . The three Khans are very popular in the Malay world , including Indonesia , Malaysia , and Singapore . The films are also fairly popular in Thailand . [211] India has cultural ties with Indonesia, and Bollywood films were introduced to the country at the end of World War II in 1945. The "angry young man" films of Amitabh Bachchan and Salim–Javed were popular during the 1970s and 1980s before Bollywood's popularity began gradually declining in the 1980s and 1990s. It experienced an Indonesian revival with the release of Shah Rukh Khan's Kuch Kuch Hota Hai (1998) in 2001, which was a bigger box-office success in the country than Titanic (1997). Bollywood has had a strong presence in Indonesia since then, particularly Shah Rukh Khan films such as Mohabbatein (2000), Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham... (2001), Kal Ho Naa Ho , Chalte Chalte and Koi... Mil Gaya (all 2003), and Veer-Zaara (2004). [212] East Asia Some Bollywood films have been widely appreciated in China , Japan , and South Korea . Several Hindi films have been commercially successful in Japan, including Mehboob Khan 's Aan (1952, starring Dilip Kumar ) and Aziz Mirza 's Raju Ban Gaya Gentleman (1992, starring Shah Rukh Khan ). The latter sparked a two-year boom in Indian films after its 1997 release, [213] with Dil Se.. (1998) a beneficiary of the boom. [214] The highest-grossing Hindi film in Japan is 3 Idiots (2009), starring Aamir Khan , [215] which received a Japanese Academy Award nomination. [216] The film was also a critical and commercial success in South Korea. [217] Dr. Kotnis Ki Amar Kahani , Awaara , and Do Bigha Zamin were successful in China during the 1940s and 1950s, and remain popular with their original audience. Few Indian films were commercially successful in the country during the 1970s and 1980s, among them Tahir Hussain 's Caravan , Noorie and Disco Dancer . [218] Indian film stars popular in China included Raj Kapoor, Nargis , [219] and Mithun Chakraborty . [218] Hindi films declined significantly in popularity in China during the 1980s. [220] Films by Aamir Khan have recently been successful, [218] [221] and Lagaan was the first Indian film with a nationwide Chinese release in 2011. [220] [222] Chinese filmmaker He Ping was impressed by Lagaan (particularly its soundtrack), and hired its composer A. R. Rahman to score his Warriors of Heaven and Earth (2003). [223] When 3 Idiots was released in China, China was the world's 15th-largest film market (partly due to its widespread pirate DVD distribution at the time). The pirate market introduced the film to Chinese audiences, however, and it became a cult hit . According to the Douban film-review site, 3 Idiots is China's 12th-most-popular film of all time; only one domestic Chinese film ( Farewell My Concubine ) ranks higher, and Aamir Khan acquired a large Chinese fan base as a result. [221] After 3 Idiots, several of Khan's other films (including 2007's Taare Zameen Par and 2008's Ghajini ) also developed cult followings. [224] China became the world's second-largest film market (after the United States) by 2013, paving the way for Khan's box-office success with Dhoom 3 (2013), PK (2014), and Dangal (2016). [221] The latter is the 16th-highest-grossing film in China , [225] the fifth-highest-grossing non- English language film worldwide, [226] and the highest-grossing non-English foreign film in any market. [227] [228] [229] Several Khan films, including Taare Zameen Par, 3 Idiots, and Dangal, are highly rated on Douban. [230] [231] His next film, Secret Superstar (2017, starring Zaira Wasim ), broke Dangal's record for the highest-grossing opening weekend by an Indian film and cemented Khan's status [232] as "a king of the Chinese box office"; [233] Secret Superstar was China's highest-grossing foreign film of 2018 to date. [234] Khan has become a household name in China, [235] with his success described as a form of Indian soft power [236] improving China–India relations despite political tensions. [219] [232] With Bollywood competing with Hollywood in the Chinese market, [237] the success of Khan's films has driven up the price for Chinese distributors of Indian film imports. [238] Salman Khan 's Bajrangi Bhaijaan and Irrfan Khan 's Hindi Medium were also Chinese hits in early 2018. [239] Oceania Although Bollywood is less successful on some Pacific islands such as New Guinea , it ranks second to Hollywood in Fiji (with its large Indian minority), Australia and New Zealand . [240] Australia also has a large South Asian diaspora, and Bollywood is popular amongst non-Asians in the country as well. [240] Since 1997, the country has been a backdrop for an increasing number of Bollywood films. [240] Indian filmmakers, attracted to Australia's diverse locations and landscapes, initially used the country as a setting for song-and-dance scenes; [240] however, Australian locations now figure in Bollywood film plots. [240] Hindi films shot in Australia usually incorporate Australian culture. Yash Raj Films ' Salaam Namaste (2005), the first Indian film shot entirely in Australia, was the most successful Bollywood film of 2005 in that country. [241] It was followed by the box-office successes Heyy Babyy , (2007) Chak De! India (2007), and Singh Is Kinng (2008). [240] Prime Minister John Howard said during a visit to India after the release of Salaam Namaste that he wanted to encourage Indian filmmaking in Australia to increase tourism, and he appointed Steve Waugh as tourism ambassador to India. [242] [ failed verification ] Australian actress Tania Zaetta , who appeared in Salaam Namaste and several other Bollywood films, was eager to expand her career in Bollywood. [243] Eastern Europe and Central Asia Bollywood films are popular in the former Soviet Union ( Russia , Eastern Europe , and Central Asia ), [244] and have been dubbed into Russian . Indian films were more popular in the Soviet Union than Hollywood films [245] [246] and, sometimes, domestic Soviet films . [247] The first Indian film released in the Soviet Union was Dharti Ke Lal (1946), directed by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas and based on the Bengal famine of 1943 , in 1949. [67] Three hundred Indian films were released in the Soviet Union after that; [248] most were Bollywood films with higher average audience figures than domestic Soviet productions. [246] [249] Fifty Indian films had over 20 million viewers, compared to 41 Hollywood films. [250] [251] Some, such as Awaara (1951) and Disco Dancer (1982), had more than 60 million viewers [252] [253] and established actors Raj Kapoor , Nargis , [253] Rishi Kapoor [254] and Mithun Chakraborty in the country. [255] According to diplomat Ashok Sharma, who served in the Commonwealth of Independent States , The popularity of Bollywood in the CIS dates back to the Soviet days when the films from Hollywood and other Western cinema centers were banned in the Soviet Union. As there was no means of other cheap entertainment, the films from Bollywood provided the Soviets a cheap source of entertainment as they were supposed to be non-controversial and non-political. In addition, the Soviet Union was recovering from the onslaught of the Second World War. The films from India, which were also recovering from the disaster of partition and the struggle for freedom from colonial rule, were found to be a good source of providing hope with entertainment to the struggling masses. The aspirations and needs of the people of both countries matched to a great extent. These films were dubbed in Russian and shown in theatres throughout the Soviet Union. The films from Bollywood also strengthened family values, which was a big factor for their popularity with the government authorities in the Soviet Union. [256] After the collapse of the Soviet film-distribution system, Hollywood filled the void in the Russian film market and Bollywood's market share shrank. [244] A 2007 Russia Today report noted a renewed interest in Bollywood by young Russians.[ citation needed ] In Poland , Shah Rukh Khan has a large following. He was introduced to Polish audiences with the 2005 release of Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham... (2001) and his other films, including Dil Se.. (1998), Main Hoon Na (2004) and Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna (2006), became hits in the country. Bollywood films are often covered in Gazeta Wyborcza , formerly Poland's largest newspaper. [257] [258] The upcoming movie Squad , is the first Indian film to be shot in Belarus . A majority of the film was shot at Belarusfilm studios, in Minsk . [259] Middle East and North Africa Hindi films have become popular in Arab countries , [260] and imported Indian films are usually subtitled in Arabic when they are released. Bollywood has progressed in Israel since the early 2000s, with channels dedicated to Indian films on cable television; [261] MBC Bollywood and Zee Aflam show Hindi movies and serials. [262] In Egypt, Bollywood films were popular during the 1970s and 1980s. In 1987, however, they were restricted to a handful of films by the Egyptian government . [263] [264] Amitabh Bachchan has remained popular in the country [265] and Indian tourists visiting Egypt are asked, "Do you know Amitabh Bachchan?" [206] Bollywood movies are regularly screened in Dubai cinemas, and Bollywood is becoming popular in Turkey; Barfi! was the first Hindi film to have a wide theatrical release in that country. [266] Bollywood also has viewers in Central Asia (particularly Uzbekistan [267] and Tajikistan ). [268] South America Bollywood films are not influential in most of South America, although its culture and dance is recognised. Due to significant South Asian diaspora communities in Suriname and Guyana , however, Hindi-language movies are popular. [269] In 2006, Dhoom 2 became the first Bollywood film to be shot in Rio de Janeiro . [270] In January 2012, it was announced that UTV Motion Pictures would begin releasing films in Peru with Guzaarish . [271] Africa Hindi films were originally distributed to some parts of Africa by Lebanese businessmen. [198] In the 1950s, Hindi and Egyptian films were generally more popular than Hollywood films in East Africa . By the 1960s, East Africa was one of the largest overseas export markets for Indian films, accounting for about 20-50% of global earnings for many Indian films. [272] Mother India (1957) continued to be screened in Nigeria decades after its release. Indian movies have influenced Hausa clothing, songs have been covered by Hausa singers, and stories have influenced Nigerian novelists. Stickers of Indian films and stars decorate taxis and buses in Nigeria's Northern Region , and posters of Indian films hang on the walls of tailoring shops and mechanics' garages. Unlike Europe and North America, where Indian films cater to the expatriate marke, Bollywood films became popular in West Africa despite the lack of a significant Indian audience. One possible explanation is cultural similarity: the wearing of turbans, animals in markets; porters carrying large bundles, and traditional wedding celebrations. Within Muslim culture, Indian movies were said to show "respect" toward women; Hollywood movies were seen as having "no shame". In Indian movies, women are modestly dressed; men and women rarely kiss and there is no nudity , so the films are said to "have culture" which Hollywood lacks. The latter "don't base themselves on the problems of the people"; Indian films are based on socialist values and the reality of developing countries emerging from years of colonialism. Indian movies permitted a new youth culture without "becoming Western." [198] The first Indian film shot in Mauritius was Souten , starring Rajesh Khanna , in 1983. [273] In South Africa , film imports from India were watched by black and Indian audiences. [274] Several Bollywood figures have travelled to Africa for films and off-camera projects. Padmashree Laloo Prasad Yadav (2005) was filmed in South Africa. [275] Dil Jo Bhi Kahey... (2005) was also filmed almost entirely in Mauritius , which has a large ethnic-Indian population. Bollywood, however, seems to be diminishing in popularity in Africa. New Bollywood films are more sexually explicit and violent. Nigerian viewers observed that older films (from the 1950s and 1960s) had more culture and were less Westernised. [198] The old days of India avidly "advocating decolonization ... and India's policy was wholly influenced by his missionary zeal to end racial domination and discrimination in the African territories" were replaced. [276] The emergence of Nollywood ( West Africa 's film industry) has also contributed to the declining popularity of Bollywood films, as sexualised Indian films became more like American films. Kishore Kumar and Amitabh Bachchan have been popular in Egypt and Somalia . [277] In Ethiopia , Bollywood movies are shown with Hollywood productions in town square theatres such as the Cinema Ethiopia in Addis Ababa . [278] Less-commercial Bollywood films are also screened elsewhere in North Africa . [279] Western Europe and North America Bollywood dancing show in London The first Indian film to be released in the Western world and receive mainstream attention was Aan (1952), directed by Mehboob Khan and starring Dilip Kumar and Nimmi . It was subtitled in 17 languages and released in 28 countries, [274] including the United Kingdom , [280] the United States , and France . [281] Aan received significant praise from British critics, and The Times compared it favourably to Hollywood productions. [282] Mehboob Khan's later Academy Award -nominated Mother India (1957) was a success in overseas markets, including Europe , [282] Russia, the Eastern Bloc , French territories , and Latin America . [283] Many Bollywood films have been commercially successful in the United Kingdom. The most successful Indian actor at the British box office has been Shah Rukh Khan , whose popularity in British Asian communities played a key role in introducing Bollywood to the UK [284] with films such as Darr (1993), [285] Dilwale Dulhaniya Le Jayenge (1995), [286] and Kuch Kuch Hota Hai (1998). [284] Dil Se (1998) was the first Indian film to enter the UK top ten. [284] A number of Indian films, such as Dilwale Dulhaniya Le Jayenge and Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham (2001), have been set in London. Bollywood is also appreciated in France, Germany , the Netherlands , [287] and Scandinavia . Bollywood films are dubbed in German and shown regularly on the German television channel RTL II . [288] Germany is the second-largest European market for Indian films, after the United Kingdom. The most recognised Indian actor in Germany is Shah Rukh Khan, who has had box-office success in the country with films such as Don 2 (2011) [258] and Om Shanti Om (2007). [129] He has a large German fan base, [206] particularly in Berlin (where the tabloid Die Tageszeitung compared his popularity to that of the pope ). [129] Michelle Obama joining students for a Bollywood dance clinic with Nakul Dev Mahajan in the White House State Dining Room, 2013 Bollywood has experienced revenue growth in Canada and the United States, particularly in the South Asian communities of large cities such as Toronto , Chicago, and New York City. [108] Yash Raj Films , one of India's largest production houses and distributors, reported in September 2005 that Bollywood films in the United States earned about $100 million per year in theatre screenings, video sales and the sale of movie soundtracks; [108] Indian films earn more money in the United States than films from any other non-English speaking country. [108] Since the mid-1990s, a number of Indian films have been largely (or entirely) shot in New York, Los Angeles, Vancouver or Toronto. Films such as The Guru (2002) and Marigold: An Adventure in India (2007) attempted to popularise Bollywood for Hollywood.[ citation needed ] Plagiarism Further information: List Hindi remakes of Hollywood movies Pressured by rushed production schedules and small budgets, some writers and musicians in Hindi cinema have been notorious to plagiarise . [289] Ideas, plot lines, tunes or riffs have been copied from other Indian film industries (including Telugu cinema , Tamil cinema , Malayalam cinema and others) or foreign films (including Hollywood and other Asian films ) without acknowledging the source. [290] Before the 1990s, plagiarism occurred with impunity. Copyright enforcement was lax in India, and few actors or directors saw an official contract. [291] The Hindi film industry was not widely known in the Global North (except in the Soviet states), who would be unaware that their material had been copied. Audiences may not have been aware of plagiarism, since many in India were unfamiliar with foreign films and music. [290] Although copyright enforcement in India is still somewhat lenient, Bollywood and other film industries are more aware of each other and Indian audiences are more familiar with foreign films and music.[ citation needed ] Organisations such as the India EU Film Initiative seek to foster a community between filmmakers and industry professionals in India and the European Union . [290] Many hit films of 1980s to 2000s was unofficial remakes (some argue, was adaptation or inspired movies) of Hollywood movies such as Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikandar (1992), Baazigar (1993), Ghulam (1998), which were said to be inspired by Breaking Away (1979), On the Waterfront (1954), and A Kiss Before Dying (1991), respectively. [292] Only after mid of 2000s Bollywood makers initiated legally purchasing copyrights of Hollywood and other foreign movies, such as Players (2012), Bang Bang! (2014) and Lal Singh Chaddha , which were official remakes of The Italian Job (2003), Knight And Day (2010) and Forrest Gump (1994), respectively. [293] [294] [295] [296] Not only Hollywood but allegedly Bollywood makers copied films from South Korean and Japanese film industry also, such as Zinda (2006), an unofficial remake of Oldboy . (2003). [297] [298] Some Bollywood directors and writers used plots from regional language films in other languages but did not acknowledge the original source. [296] A commonly-reported justification for plagiarism in Bollywood is that cautious producers want to remake popular Hollywood films in an Indian context. Although screenwriters generally produce original scripts, many are rejected due to uncertainty about whether a film will be successful. [290] Poorly-paid screenwriters have also been criticised for a lack of creativity. [299] Some filmmakers see plagiarism in Bollywood as an integral part of globalisation, with which Western (particularly American) culture is embedding itself into Indian culture. [299] Vikram Bhatt , director of Raaz (a remake of What Lies Beneath ) and Kasoor (a remake of Jagged Edge ), has spoken about the influence of American culture and Bollywood's desire to produce box-office hits based along the same lines: "Financially, I would be more secure knowing that a particular piece of work has already done well at the box office. Copying is endemic everywhere in India. Our TV shows are adaptations of American programmes. We want their films, their cars, their planes, their Diet Cokes and also their attitude. The American way of life is creeping into our culture." [299] According to Mahesh Bhatt , "If you hide the source, you're a genius. There's no such thing as originality in the creative sphere". [299] Although very few cases of film-copyright violations have been taken to court because of a slow legal process, [290] the makers of Partner (2007) and Zinda (2005) were targeted by the owners and distributors of the original films: Hitch and Oldboy . [300] [301] The American studio 20th Century Fox brought Mumbai-based B. R. Films to court over the latter's forthcoming Banda Yeh Bindaas Hai , which Fox alleged was an illegal remake of My Cousin Vinny . B. R. Films eventually settled out of court for about $200,000, paving the way for its film's release. [302] Some studios comply with copyright law; in 2008, Orion Pictures secured the rights to remake Hollywood's Wedding Crashers . [303] Music The Pakistani Qawwali musician Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan had a big impact on Hindi film music, inspiring numerous Indian musicians working in Bollywood, especially during the 1990s. However, there were many instances of Indian music directors plagiarising Khan's music to produce hit filmi songs. [304] [305] Several popular examples include Viju Shah 's hit song "Tu Cheez Badi Hai Mast Mast" in Mohra (1994) being plagiarised from Khan's popular Qawwali song " Dam Mast Qalandar ", [304] "Mera Piya Ghar Aya" used in Yaarana (1995), and "Sanoo Ek Pal Chain Na Aaye" in Judaai (1997). [304] Despite the significant number of hit Bollywood songs plagiarised from his music, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan was reportedly tolerant towards the plagiarism. [76] [306] One of the Bollywood music directors who frequently plagiarised him, Anu Malik , claimed that he loved Khan's music and was actually showing admiration by using his tunes. [306] However, Khan was reportedly aggrieved when Malik turned his spiritual "Allah Hoo, Allah Hoo" into "I Love You, I Love You" in Auzaar (1997). [76] Khan said "he has taken my devotional song Allahu and converted it into I love you. He should at least respect my religious songs." [306] Bollywood soundtracks also plagiarised Guinean singer Mory Kanté , particularly his 1987 album Akwaba Beach. His song, "Tama", inspired two Bollywood songs : Bappi Lahiri 's "Tamma Tamma" in Thanedaar (1990) and "Jumma Chumma" in Laxmikant–Pyarelal 's soundtrack for Hum (1991). The latter also featured "Ek Doosre Se", which copied Kanté's "Inch Allah". [307] His song " Yé ké yé ké " was used as background music in the 1990 Bollywood film Agneepath , inspired the Bollywood song "Tamma Tamma" in Thanedaar. [307] Film education Film and Television Institute of India (FTII) is the government film making education school. The institute is situated in Pune , Maharashtra . [308] See also
Toggle the table of contents Musical theatre From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Stage work that combines songs, music, spoken dialogue, acting, and dance Not to be confused with Music theatre . The Black Crook was a hit musical on Broadway in 1866. [1] Musical theatre is a form of theatrical performance that combines songs, spoken dialogue , acting and dance. The story and emotional content of a musical – humor, pathos , love, anger – are communicated through words, music, movement and technical aspects of the entertainment as an integrated whole. Although musical theatre overlaps with other theatrical forms like opera and dance, it may be distinguished by the equal importance given to the music as compared with the dialogue, movement and other elements. Since the early 20th century, musical theatre stage works have generally been called, simply, musicals. Although music has been a part of dramatic presentations since ancient times, modern Western musical theatre emerged during the 19th century, with many structural elements established by the works of Gilbert and Sullivan in Britain and those of Harrigan and Hart in America. These were followed by Edwardian musical comedies , which emerged in Britain, and the musical theatre works of American creators like George M. Cohan at the turn of the 20th century. The Princess Theatre musicals (1915–1918) were artistic steps forward beyond the revues and other frothy entertainments of the early 20th century and led to such groundbreaking works as Show Boat (1927), Of Thee I Sing (1931) and Oklahoma! (1943). Some of the most famous musicals through the decades that followed include My Fair Lady (1956), The Fantasticks (1960), Hair (1967), A Chorus Line (1975), Les Misérables (1985), The Phantom of the Opera (1986), Rent (1996), Wicked (2003) and Hamilton (2015). Musicals are performed around the world. They may be presented in large venues, such as big-budget Broadway or West End productions in New York City or London. Alternatively, musicals may be staged in smaller venues, such as off-Broadway , off-off-Broadway , regional theatre , fringe theatre , or community theatre productions, or on tour . Musicals are often presented by amateur and school groups in churches, schools and other performance spaces. In addition to the United States and Britain, there are vibrant musical theatre scenes in continental Europe, Asia, Australasia, Canada and Latin America. Definitions and scope[ edit ] Book musicals[ edit ] A Gaiety Girl (1893) was one of the first hit musicals. Since the 20th century, the "book musical" has been defined as a musical play where songs and dances are fully integrated into a well-made story with serious dramatic goals and which is able to evoke genuine emotions other than laughter. [2] [3] The three main components of a book musical are its music, lyrics and book. The book or script of a musical refers to the story, character development and dramatic structure, including the spoken dialogue and stage directions, but it can also refer to the dialogue and lyrics together, which are sometimes referred to as the libretto (Italian for "small book"). The music and lyrics together form the score of a musical and include songs, incidental music and musical scenes, which are "theatrical sequence[s] set to music, often combining song with spoken dialogue." [4] The interpretation of a musical is the responsibility of its creative team, which includes a director, a musical director, usually a choreographer and sometimes an orchestrator . A musical's production is also creatively characterized by technical aspects, such as set design , costumes , stage properties (props) , lighting and sound . The creative team, designs and interpretations generally change from the original production to succeeding productions. Some production elements, however, may be retained from the original production, for example, Bob Fosse 's choreography in Chicago . There is no fixed length for a musical. While it can range from a short one-act entertainment to several acts and several hours in length (or even a multi-evening presentation), most musicals range from one and a half to three hours. Musicals are usually presented in two acts, with one short intermission , and the first act is frequently longer than the second. The first act generally introduces nearly all of the characters and most of the music and often ends with the introduction of a dramatic conflict or plot complication while the second act may introduce a few new songs but usually contains reprises of important musical themes and resolves the conflict or complication. A book musical is usually built around four to six main theme tunes that are reprised later in the show, although it sometimes consists of a series of songs not directly musically related. Spoken dialogue is generally interspersed between musical numbers, although "sung dialogue" or recitative may be used, especially in so-called " sung-through " musicals such as Jesus Christ Superstar , Falsettos , Les Misérables , Evita and Hamilton . Several shorter musicals on Broadway and in the West End in the 21st century have been presented in one act. Moments of greatest dramatic intensity in a book musical are often performed in song. Proverbially, "when the emotion becomes too strong for speech, you sing; when it becomes too strong for song, you dance." [5] In a book musical, a song is ideally crafted to suit the character (or characters) and their situation within the story; although there have been times in the history of the musical (e.g. from the 1890s to the 1920s) when this integration between music and story has been tenuous. As The New York Times critic Ben Brantley described the ideal of song in theatre when reviewing the 2008 revival of Gypsy : "There is no separation at all between song and character, which is what happens in those uncommon moments when musicals reach upward to achieve their ideal reasons to be." [6] Typically, many fewer words are sung in a five-minute song than are spoken in a five-minute block of dialogue. Therefore, there is less time to develop drama in a musical than in a straight play of equivalent length, since a musical usually devotes more time to music than to dialogue. Within the compressed nature of a musical, the writers must develop the characters and the plot. The material presented in a musical may be original, or it may be adapted from novels ( Wicked and Man of La Mancha ), plays ( Hello, Dolly! and Carousel ), classic legends ( Camelot ), historical events (Evita and Hamilton) or films ( The Producers and Billy Elliot ). On the other hand, many successful musical theatre works have been adapted for musical films , such as West Side Story , My Fair Lady , The Sound of Music , Oliver! and Chicago . Comparisons with opera[ edit ] George Gershwin Musical theatre is closely related to the theatrical form of opera, but the two are usually distinguished by weighing a number of factors. First, musicals generally have a greater focus on spoken dialogue. [7] Some musicals, however, are entirely accompanied and sung-through, while some operas, such as Die Zauberflöte , and most operettas , have some unaccompanied dialogue. [7] Second, musicals usually include more dancing as an essential part of the storytelling, particularly by the principal performers as well as the chorus. Third, musicals often use various genres of popular music or at least popular singing and musical styles. [8] Finally, musicals usually avoid certain operatic conventions. In particular, a musical is almost always performed in the language of its audience. Musicals produced on Broadway or in the West End, for instance, are invariably sung in English, even if they were originally written in another language. While an opera singer is primarily a singer and only secondarily an actor (and rarely needs to dance), a musical theatre performer is often an actor first but must also be a singer and dancer. Someone who is equally accomplished at all three is referred to as a "triple threat". Composers of music for musicals often consider the vocal demands of roles with musical theatre performers in mind. Today, large theatres that stage musicals generally use microphones and amplification of the actors' singing voices in a way that would generally be disapproved of in an operatic context. [9] Some works, including those by George Gershwin , Leonard Bernstein and Stephen Sondheim , have been made into both musical theatre and operatic productions. [10] [11] Similarly, some older operettas or light operas (such as The Pirates of Penzance by Gilbert and Sullivan ) have been produced in modern adaptations that treat them as musicals. For some works, production styles are almost as important as the work's musical or dramatic content in defining into which art form the piece falls. [12] Sondheim said, "I really think that when something plays Broadway it's a musical, and when it plays in an opera house it's opera. That's it. It's the terrain, the countryside, the expectations of the audience that make it one thing or another." [13] There remains an overlap in form between lighter operatic forms and more musically complex or ambitious musicals. In practice, it is often difficult to distinguish among the various kinds of musical theatre, including "musical play", "musical comedy", "operetta" and "light opera". [14] Like opera, the singing in musical theatre is generally accompanied by an instrumental ensemble called a pit orchestra , located in a lowered area in front of the stage. While opera typically uses a conventional symphony orchestra , musicals are generally orchestrated for ensembles ranging from 27 players down to only a few players . Rock musicals usually employ a small group of mostly rock instruments, [15] and some musicals may call for only a piano or two instruments. [16] The music in musicals uses a range of "styles and influences including operetta , classical techniques, folk music , jazz [and] local or historical styles [that] are appropriate to the setting." [4] Musicals may begin with an overture played by the orchestra that "weav[es] together excerpts of the score's famous melodies." [17] Eastern traditions and other forms[ edit ] There are various Eastern traditions of theatre that include music, such as Chinese opera , Taiwanese opera , Japanese Noh and Indian musical theatre , including Sanskrit drama , Indian classical dance , Parsi theatre and Yakshagana . [18] India has, since the 20th century, produced numerous musical films, referred to as " Bollywood " musicals, and in Japan a series of 2.5D musicals based on popular anime and manga comics has developed in recent decades. Shorter or simplified "junior" versions of many musicals are available for schools and youth groups, and very short works created or adapted for performance by children are sometimes called minimusicals . [19] [20] Main article: Development of musical theatre A view of Rhodes by John Webb , which was painted on a backshutter for the first performance of The Siege of Rhodes (1656) The antecedents of musical theatre in Europe can be traced back to the theatre of ancient Greece , where music and dance were included in stage comedies and tragedies during the 5th century BCE. [21] [22] The music from the ancient forms is lost, however, and they had little influence on later development of musical theatre. [23] In the 12th and 13th centuries, religious dramas taught the liturgy . Groups of actors would use outdoor Pageant wagons (stages on wheels) to tell each part of the story. Poetic forms sometimes alternated with the prose dialogues, and liturgical chants gave way to new melodies. [24] The European Renaissance saw older forms evolve into two antecedents of musical theatre: commedia dell'arte , where raucous clowns improvised familiar stories, and later, opera buffa . In England, Elizabethan and Jacobean plays frequently included music, [25] and short musical plays began to be included in an evenings' dramatic entertainments. [26] Court masques developed during the Tudor period that involved music, dancing, singing and acting, often with expensive costumes and a complex stage design . [27] [28] These developed into sung plays that are recognizable as English operas, the first usually being thought of as The Siege of Rhodes (1656). [29] In France, meanwhile, Molière turned several of his farcical comedies into musical entertainments with songs (music provided by Jean-Baptiste Lully ) and dance in the late 17th century. These influenced a brief period of English opera [30] by composers such as John Blow [31] and Henry Purcell . [29] From the 18th century, the most popular forms of musical theatre in Britain were ballad operas , like John Gay 's The Beggar's Opera , that included lyrics written to the tunes of popular songs of the day (often spoofing opera), and later pantomime , which developed from commedia dell'arte, and comic opera with mostly romantic plot lines, like Michael Balfe 's The Bohemian Girl (1845). Meanwhile, on the continent, singspiel , comédie en vaudeville , opéra comique , zarzuela and other forms of light musical entertainment were emerging. The Beggar's Opera was the first recorded long-running play of any kind, running for 62 successive performances in 1728. It would take almost a century afterwards before any play broke 100 performances, [32] but the record soon reached 150 in the late 1820s. [33] [34] Other musical theatre forms developed in England by the 19th century, such as music hall , melodrama and burletta , which were popularized partly because most London theatres were licensed only as music halls and not allowed to present plays without music. Colonial America did not have a significant theatre presence until 1752, when London entrepreneur William Hallam sent a company of actors to the colonies managed by his brother Lewis . [35] In New York in the summer of 1753, they performed ballad-operas, such as The Beggar's Opera, and ballad-farces. [35] By the 1840s, P. T. Barnum was operating an entertainment complex in lower Manhattan. [36] Other early musical theatre in America consisted of British forms, such as burletta and pantomime, [23] but what a piece was called did not necessarily define what it was. The 1852 Broadway extravaganza The Magic Deer advertised itself as "A Serio Comico Tragico Operatical Historical Extravaganzical Burletical Tale of Enchantment." [37] Theatre in New York moved from downtown gradually to midtown from around 1850 and did not arrive in the Times Square area until the 1920s and 1930s. New York runs lagged far behind those in London, but Laura Keene 's "musical burletta" Seven Sisters (1860) shattered previous New York musical theatre record, with a run of 253 performances. [38] 1850s to 1880s[ edit ] Poster, c. 1879 Around 1850, the French composer Hervé was experimenting with a form of comic musical theatre he called opérette . [39] The best known composers of operetta were Jacques Offenbach from the 1850s to the 1870s and Johann Strauss II in the 1870s and 1880s. [23] Offenbach's fertile melodies, combined with his librettists' witty satire, formed a model for the musical theatre that followed. [39] Adaptations of the French operettas (played in mostly bad, risqué translations), musical burlesques , music hall, pantomime and burletta dominated the London musical stage into the 1870s. [40] In America, mid-19th century musical theatre entertainments included crude variety revue , which eventually developed into vaudeville , minstrel shows , which soon crossed the Atlantic to Britain, and Victorian burlesque, first popularized in the US by British troupes. [23] A hugely successful musical that premiered in New York in 1866, The Black Crook , was an original musical theatre piece that conformed to many of the modern definitions of a musical, including dance and original music that helped to tell the story. The spectacular production, famous for its skimpy costumes, ran for a record-breaking 474 performances. [41] The same year, The Black Domino/Between You, Me and the Post was the first show to call itself a "musical comedy." Comedians Edward Harrigan and Tony Hart produced and starred in musicals on Broadway between 1878 (The Mulligan Guard Picnic) and 1885. These musical comedies featured characters and situations taken from the everyday life of New York's lower classes and represented a significant step forward towards a more legitimate theatrical form. They starred high quality singers ( Lillian Russell , Vivienne Segal and Fay Templeton ) instead of the ladies of questionable repute who had starred in earlier musical forms. As transportation improved, poverty in London and New York diminished, and street lighting made for safer travel at night, the number of patrons for the growing number of theatres increased enormously. Plays ran longer, leading to better profits and improved production values, and men began to bring their families to the theatre. The first musical theatre piece to exceed 500 consecutive performances was the French operetta The Chimes of Normandy in 1878 (705 performances). [33] [42] English comic opera adopted many of the successful ideas of European operetta, none more successfully than the series of more than a dozen long-running Gilbert and Sullivan comic operas, including H.M.S. Pinafore (1878) and The Mikado (1885). [39] These were sensations on both sides of the Atlantic and in Australia and helped to raise the standard for what was considered a successful show. [43] These shows were designed for family audiences, a marked contrast from the risqué burlesques, bawdy music hall shows and French operettas that sometimes drew a crowd seeking less wholesome entertainment. [40] Only a few 19th-century musical pieces exceeded the run of The Mikado, such as Dorothy , which opened in 1886 and set a new record with a run of 931 performances. Gilbert and Sullivan's influence on later musical theatre was profound, creating examples of how to "integrate" musicals so that the lyrics and dialogue advanced a coherent story. [44] [45] Their works were admired and copied by early authors and composers of musicals in Britain [46] [47] and America. [43] [48] 1890s to the new century[ edit ] Further information: Edwardian musical comedy Cover of the Vocal Score of Sidney Jones ' The Geisha A Trip to Chinatown (1891) was Broadway's long-run champion (until Irene in 1919), running for 657 performances, but New York runs continued to be relatively short, with a few exceptions, compared with London runs, until the 1920s. [33] Gilbert and Sullivan were widely pirated and also were imitated in New York by productions such as Reginald De Koven 's Robin Hood (1891) and John Philip Sousa 's El Capitan (1896). A Trip to Coontown (1898) was the first musical comedy entirely produced and performed by African Americans on Broadway (largely inspired by the routines of the minstrel shows ), followed by ragtime -tinged shows. Hundreds of musical comedies were staged on Broadway in the 1890s and early 20th century, composed of songs written in New York's Tin Pan Alley , including those by George M. Cohan , who worked to create an American style distinct from the Gilbert and Sullivan works. The most successful New York shows were often followed by extensive national tours. [49] Meanwhile, musicals took over the London stage in the Gay Nineties , led by producer George Edwardes , who perceived that audiences wanted a new alternative to the Savoy -style comic operas and their intellectual, political, absurdist satire. He experimented with a modern-dress, family-friendly musical theatre style, with breezy, popular songs, snappy, romantic banter, and stylish spectacle at the Gaiety and his other theatres. These drew on the traditions of comic opera and used elements of burlesque and of the Harrigan and Hart pieces. He replaced the bawdy women of burlesque with his "respectable" corps of Gaiety Girls to complete the musical and visual fun. The success of the first of these, In Town (1892) and A Gaiety Girl (1893) set the style for the next three decades. The plots were generally light, romantic "poor maiden loves aristocrat and wins him against all odds" shows, with music by Ivan Caryll , Sidney Jones and Lionel Monckton . These shows were immediately widely copied in America, and Edwardian musical comedy swept away the earlier musical forms of comic opera and operetta. The Geisha (1896) was one of the most successful in the 1890s, running for more than two years and achieving great international success. The Belle of New York (1898) became the first American musical to run for over a year in London. The British musical comedy Florodora (1899) was a popular success on both sides of the Atlantic, as was A Chinese Honeymoon (1901), which ran for a record-setting 1,074 performances in London and 376 in New York. [34] After the turn of the 20th century, Seymour Hicks joined forces with Edwardes and American producer Charles Frohman to create another decade of popular shows. Other enduring Edwardian musical comedy hits included The Arcadians (1909) and The Quaker Girl (1910). [50] Early 20th century[ edit ] Victor Herbert Virtually eliminated from the English-speaking stage by competition from the ubiquitous Edwardian musical comedies, operettas returned to London and Broadway in 1907 with The Merry Widow , and adaptations of continental operettas became direct competitors with musicals. Franz Lehár and Oscar Straus composed new operettas that were popular in English until World War I. [51] In America, Victor Herbert produced a string of enduring operettas including The Fortune Teller (1898), Babes in Toyland (1903), Mlle. Modiste (1905), The Red Mill (1906) and Naughty Marietta (1910). In the 1910s, the team of P. G. Wodehouse , Guy Bolton and Jerome Kern , following in the footsteps of Gilbert and Sullivan , created the " Princess Theatre shows" and paved the way for Kern's later work by showing that a musical could combine light, popular entertainment with continuity between its story and songs. [44] Historian Gerald Bordman wrote: These shows built and polished the mold from which almost all later major musical comedies evolved. ... The characters and situations were, within the limitations of musical comedy license, believable and the humor came from the situations or the nature of the characters. Kern's exquisitely flowing melodies were employed to further the action or develop characterization. ... [Edwardian] musical comedy was often guilty of inserting songs in a hit-or-miss fashion. The Princess Theatre musicals brought about a change in approach. P. G. Wodehouse, the most observant, literate and witty lyricist of his day, and the team of Bolton, Wodehouse and Kern had an influence felt to this day. [52] The theatre-going public needed escapist entertainment during the dark times of World War I , and they flocked to the theatre. The 1919 hit musical Irene ran for 670 performances, a Broadway record that held until 1938. [53] The British theatre public supported far longer runs like that of The Maid of the Mountains (1,352 performances) and especially Chu Chin Chow . Its run of 2,238 performances was more than twice as long as any previous musical, setting a record that stood for nearly forty years. [54] Even a revival of The Beggar's Opera held the stage for 1,463 performances. [55] Revues like The Bing Boys Are Here in Britain, and those of Florenz Ziegfeld and his imitators in America, were also extraordinarily popular. [37] Sheet music from Sally , 1920 The musicals of the Roaring Twenties , borrowing from vaudeville, music hall and other light entertainments, tended to emphasize big dance routines and popular songs at the expense of plot. Typical of the decade were lighthearted productions like Sally ; Lady, Be Good ; No, No, Nanette ; Oh, Kay! ; and Funny Face . Despite forgettable stories, these musicals featured stars such as Marilyn Miller and Fred Astaire and produced dozens of enduring popular songs by Kern, George and Ira Gershwin , Irving Berlin , Cole Porter and Rodgers and Hart . Popular music was dominated by musical theatre standards, such as " Fascinating Rhythm ", " Tea for Two " and " Someone to Watch Over Me ". Many shows were revues , series of sketches and songs with little or no connection between them. The best-known of these were the annual Ziegfeld Follies , spectacular song-and-dance revues on Broadway featuring extravagant sets, elaborate costumes and beautiful chorus girls. [23] These spectacles also raised production values, and mounting a musical generally became more expensive. [37] Shuffle Along (1921), an all-African American show was a hit on Broadway. [56] A new generation of composers of operettas also emerged in the 1920s, such as Rudolf Friml and Sigmund Romberg , to create a series of popular Broadway hits. [57] In London, writer-stars such as Ivor Novello and Noël Coward became popular, but the primacy of British musical theatre from the 19th century through 1920 was gradually replaced by American innovation, especially after World War I, as Kern and other Tin Pan Alley composers began to bring new musical styles such as ragtime and jazz to the theatres, and the Shubert Brothers took control of the Broadway theatres. Musical theatre writer Andrew Lamb notes, "The operatic and theatrical styles of nineteenth-century social structures were replaced by a musical style more aptly suited to twentieth-century society and its vernacular idiom. It was from America that the more direct style emerged, and in America that it was able to flourish in a developing society less hidebound by nineteenth-century tradition." [58] In France, comédie musicale was written between in the early decades of the century for such stars as Yvonne Printemps . [59] Show Boat and the Great Depression[ edit ] Progressing far beyond the comparatively frivolous musicals and sentimental operettas of the decade, Broadway's Show Boat (1927), represented an even more complete integration of book and score than the Princess Theatre musicals, with dramatic themes told through the music, dialogue, setting and movement. This was accomplished by combining the lyricism of Kern's music with the skillful libretto of Oscar Hammerstein II . One historian wrote, "Here we come to a completely new genre – the musical play as distinguished from musical comedy. Now ... everything else was subservient to that play. Now ... came complete integration of song, humor and production numbers into a single and inextricable artistic entity." [60] Rodgers and Hart As the Great Depression set in during the post-Broadway national tour of Show Boat, the public turned back to mostly light, escapist song-and-dance entertainment. [52] Audiences on both sides of the Atlantic had little money to spend on entertainment, and only a few stage shows anywhere exceeded a run of 500 performances during the decade. The revue The Band Wagon (1931) starred dancing partners Fred Astaire and his sister Adele , while Porter's Anything Goes (1934) confirmed Ethel Merman 's position as the First Lady of musical theatre, a title she maintained for many years. Coward and Novello continued to deliver old fashioned, sentimental musicals, such as The Dancing Years , while Rodgers and Hart returned from Hollywood to create a series of successful Broadway shows, including On Your Toes (1936, with Ray Bolger , the first Broadway musical to make dramatic use of classical dance), Babes in Arms (1937) and The Boys from Syracuse (1938). Porter added Du Barry Was a Lady (1939). The longest-running piece of musical theatre of the 1930s in the US was Hellzapoppin (1938), a revue with audience participation, which played for 1,404 performances, setting a new Broadway record. [53] In Britain, Me and My Girl ran for 1,646 performances. [55] Still, a few creative teams began to build on Show Boat's innovations. Of Thee I Sing (1931), a political satire by the Gershwins, was the first musical awarded the Pulitzer Prize . [23] [61] As Thousands Cheer (1933), a revue by Irving Berlin and Moss Hart in which each song or sketch was based on a newspaper headline, marked the first Broadway show in which an African-American, Ethel Waters , starred alongside white actors. Waters' numbers included " Supper Time ", a woman's lament for her husband who has been lynched. [62] The Gershwins' Porgy and Bess (1935) featured an all African-American cast and blended operatic, folk and jazz idioms. The Cradle Will Rock (1937), directed by Orson Welles , was a highly political pro- union piece that, despite the controversy surrounding it, ran for 108 performances. [37] Rodgers and Hart's I'd Rather Be Right (1937) was a political satire with George M. Cohan as President Franklin D. Roosevelt , and Kurt Weill 's Knickerbocker Holiday depicted New York City's early history while good-naturedly satirizing Roosevelt's good intentions. The motion picture mounted a challenge to the stage. Silent films had presented only limited competition, but by the end of the 1920s, films like The Jazz Singer could be presented with synchronized sound. "Talkie" films at low prices effectively killed off vaudeville by the early 1930s. [63] Despite the economic woes of the 1930s and the competition from film, the musical survived. In fact, it continued to evolve thematically beyond the gags and showgirls musicals of the Gay Nineties and Roaring Twenties and the sentimental romance of operetta, adding technical expertise and the fast-paced staging and naturalistic dialogue style led by director George Abbott . [23] The Golden Age (1940s to 1960s)[ edit ] 1940s[ edit ] The 1940s would begin with more hits from Porter, Irving Berlin , Rodgers and Hart, Weill and Gershwin, some with runs over 500 performances as the economy rebounded, but artistic change was in the air. Rodgers and Hammerstein 's Oklahoma! (1943) completed the revolution begun by Show Boat , by tightly integrating all the aspects of musical theatre, with a cohesive plot, songs that furthered the action of the story, and featured dream ballets and other dances that advanced the plot and developed the characters, rather than using dance as an excuse to parade scantily clad women across the stage. [3] Rodgers and Hammerstein hired ballet choreographer Agnes de Mille , who used everyday motions to help the characters express their ideas. It defied musical conventions by raising its first act curtain not on a bevy of chorus girls, but rather on a woman churning butter, with an off-stage voice singing the opening lines of Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin' unaccompanied. It drew rave reviews, set off a box-office frenzy and received a Pulitzer Prize . [64] Brooks Atkinson wrote in The New York Times that the show's opening number changed the history of musical theatre: "After a verse like that, sung to a buoyant melody, the banalities of the old musical stage became intolerable." [65] It was the first "blockbuster" Broadway show, running a total of 2,212 performances, and was made into a hit film. It remains one of the most frequently produced of the team's projects. William A. Everett and Paul R. Laird wrote that this was a "show, that, like Show Boat, became a milestone, so that later historians writing about important moments in twentieth-century theatre would begin to identify eras according to their relationship to Oklahoma!". [66] Mary Martin starred in several Broadway hits of this era "After Oklahoma!, Rodgers and Hammerstein were the most important contributors to the musical-play form... The examples they set in creating vital plays, often rich with social thought, provided the necessary encouragement for other gifted writers to create musical plays of their own". [60] The two collaborators created an extraordinary collection of some of musical theatre's best loved and most enduring classics, including Carousel (1945), South Pacific (1949), The King and I (1951) and The Sound of Music (1959). Some of these musicals treat more serious subject matter than most earlier shows: the villain in Oklahoma! is a suspected murderer and psychopath; Carousel deals with spousal abuse, thievery, suicide and the afterlife; South Pacific explores miscegenation even more thoroughly than Show Boat; the hero of The King and I dies onstage; and the backdrop of The Sound of Music is the annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany in 1938 . The show's creativity stimulated Rodgers and Hammerstein's contemporaries and ushered in the "Golden Age" of American musical theatre. [65] Americana was displayed on Broadway during the "Golden Age", as the wartime cycle of shows began to arrive. An example of this is On the Town (1944), written by Betty Comden and Adolph Green , composed by Leonard Bernstein and choreographed by Jerome Robbins . The story is set during wartime and concerns three sailors who are on a 24-hour shore leave in New York City, during which each falls in love. The show also gives the impression of a country with an uncertain future, as the sailors and their women also have. Irving Berlin used sharpshooter Annie Oakley 's career as a basis for his Annie Get Your Gun (1946, 1,147 performances); Burton Lane , E. Y. Harburg and Fred Saidy combined political satire with Irish whimsy for their fantasy Finian's Rainbow (1947, 725 performances); and Cole Porter found inspiration in William Shakespeare 's The Taming of the Shrew for Kiss Me, Kate (1948, 1,077 performances). The American musicals overwhelmed the old-fashioned British Coward/Novello-style shows, one of the last big successes of which was Novello's Perchance to Dream (1945, 1,021 performances). [55] The formula for the Golden Age musicals reflected one or more of four widely held perceptions of the "American dream": That stability and worth derives from a love relationship sanctioned and restricted by Protestant ideals of marriage; that a married couple should make a moral home with children away from the city in a suburb or small town; that the woman's function was as homemaker and mother; and that Americans incorporate an independent and pioneering spirit or that their success is self-made. [67]
e Ballet ( French: [balɛ] ) is a type of performance dance that originated during the Italian Renaissance in the fifteenth century and later developed into a concert dance form in France and Russia. It has since become a widespread and highly technical form of dance with its own vocabulary . Ballet has been influential globally and has defined the foundational techniques which are used in many other dance genres and cultures. Various schools around the world have incorporated their own cultures. As a result, ballet has evolved in distinct ways. A ballet as a unified work comprises the choreography and music for a ballet production. Ballets are choreographed and performed by trained ballet dancers . Traditional classical ballets are usually performed with classical music accompaniment and use elaborate costumes and staging, whereas modern ballets are often performed in simple costumes and without elaborate sets or scenery. Etymology Ballet is a French word which had its origin in Italian balletto, a diminutive of ballo (dance) which comes from Latin ballo, ballare, meaning "to dance", [1] [2] which in turn comes from the Greek "βαλλίζω" (ballizo), "to dance, to jump about". [2] [3] The word came into English usage from the French around 1630. History Louis XIV as Apollo in the Ballet Royal de la Nuit (1653) Ballet originated in the Italian Renaissance courts of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Under Catherine de' Medici 's influence as Queen, it spread to France, where it developed even further. [4] The dancers in these early court ballets were mostly noble amateurs.  Ornamented costumes were meant to impress viewers, but they restricted performers' freedom of movement. [5] The ballets were performed in large chambers with viewers on three sides.  The implementation of the proscenium arch from 1618 on distanced performers from audience members, who could then better view and appreciate the technical feats of the professional dancers in the productions. [6] [7] French court ballet reached its height under the reign of King Louis XIV . Louis founded the Académie Royale de Danse (Royal Dance Academy) in 1661 to establish standards and certify dance instructors. [8] In 1672, Louis XIV made Jean-Baptiste Lully the director of the Académie Royale de Musique ( Paris Opera ) from which the first professional ballet company , the Paris Opera Ballet , arose. [9] Pierre Beauchamp served as Lully's ballet-master . Together their partnership would drastically influence the development of ballet, as evidenced by the credit given to them for the creation of the five major positions of the feet.  By 1681, the first "ballerinas" took the stage following years of training at the Académie. [5] Ballet started to decline in France after 1830, but it continued to develop in Denmark, Italy, and Russia. The arrival in Europe of the Ballets Russes led by Sergei Diaghilev on the eve of the First World War revived interest in the ballet and started the modern era. [10] In the twentieth century, ballet had a wide influence on other dance genres, [11] Also in the twentieth century, ballet took a turn dividing it from classical ballet to the introduction of modern dance , leading to modernist movements in several countries. [12] Famous dancers of the twentieth century include Anna Pavlova , Galina Ulanova , Rudolf Nureyev , Maya Plisetskaya , Margot Fonteyn , Rosella Hightower , Maria Tall Chief , Erik Bruhn , Mikhail Baryshnikov , Suzanne Farrell , Gelsey Kirkland , Natalia Makarova , Arthur Mitchell , and Jeanne Devereaux . [13] Jeanne Devereaux performed as a prima ballerina for three decades and set a world's record by being able to execute 16 triple fouettes. [14] Styles Marie Sallé , classical ballet dancer Stylistic variations and subgenres have evolved over time. Early, classical variations are primarily associated with geographic origin. Examples of this are Russian ballet , French ballet , and Italian ballet . Later variations, such as contemporary ballet and neoclassical ballet, incorporate both classical ballet and non-traditional technique and movement. Perhaps the most widely known and performed ballet style is late Romantic ballet (or Ballet blanc ). Classical ballet Main article: Classical ballet The Valse des cygnes from Act II of the Ivanov/Petipa edition of Swan Lake Classical ballet is based on traditional ballet technique and vocabulary . [15] Different styles have emerged in different countries, such as French ballet , Italian ballet , English ballet , and Russian ballet . Several of the classical ballet styles are associated with specific training methods, typically named after their creators (see below).  The Royal Academy of Dance method is a ballet technique and training system that was founded by a diverse group of ballet dancers. They merged their respective dance methods (Italian, French, Danish and Russian) to create a new style of ballet that is unique to the organization and is recognized internationally as the English style of ballet. [10] Some examples of classical ballet productions are: Swan Lake , The Sleeping Beauty and The Nutcracker . Romantic ballet Main article: Romantic ballet Carlotta Grisi , the original Giselle , 1841, wearing the romantic tutu Romantic ballet was an artistic movement of classical ballet and several productions remain in the classical repertoire today. The Romantic era was marked by the emergence of pointe work, the dominance of female dancers, and longer, flowy tutus that attempt to exemplify softness and a delicate aura. [5] This movement occurred during the early to mid-nineteenth century (the Romantic era ) and featured themes that emphasized intense emotion as a source of aesthetic experience. The plots of many romantic ballets revolved around spirit women (sylphs, wilis, and ghosts) who enslaved the hearts and senses of mortal men. The 1827 ballet La Sylphide is widely considered to be the first, and the 1870 ballet Coppélia is considered to be the last. [4] Famous ballet dancers of the Romantic era include Marie Taglioni , Fanny Elssler , and Jules Perrot . Jules Perrot is also known for his choreography, especially that of Giselle , often considered to be the most widely celebrated romantic ballet. [5] Neoclassical ballet Alexandra Danilova and Serge Lifar , Apollon Musagète, 1928 Neoclassical ballet is usually abstract, with no clear plot, costumes or scenery. Music choice can be diverse and will often include music that is also neoclassical (e.g. Stravinsky , Roussel ). Tim Scholl, author of From Petipa to Balanchine, considers George Balanchine 's Apollo in 1928 to be the first neoclassical ballet. Apollo represented a return to form in response to Sergei Diaghilev 's abstract ballets. Balanchine worked with modern dance choreographer Martha Graham , and brought modern dancers into his company such as Paul Taylor , who in 1959 performed in Balanchine's Episodes . [16] While Balanchine is widely considered the face of neoclassical ballet, there were others who made significant contributions. Frederick Ashton 's Symphonic Variations (1946) is a seminal work for the choreographer. Set to César Franck 's score of the same title, it is a pure-dance interpretation of the score. [5] Another form, Modern Ballet , also emerged as an offshoot of neoclassicism. Among the innovators in this form were Glen Tetley , Robert Joffrey and Gerald Arpino . While difficult to parse modern ballet from neoclassicism, the work of these choreographers favored a greater athleticism that departed from the delicacy of ballet. The physicality was more daring, with mood, subject matter and music more intense. An example of this would be Joffrey's Astarte (1967), which featured a rock score and sexual overtones in the choreography. [10] Contemporary ballet Main article: Contemporary ballet A ballet jump performed with modern, non-classical form in a contemporary ballet This ballet style is often performed barefoot. Contemporary ballets may include mime and acting , and are usually set to music (typically orchestral but occasionally vocal). It can be difficult to differentiate this form from neoclassical or modern ballet. Contemporary ballet is also close to contemporary dance because many contemporary ballet concepts come from the ideas and innovations of twentieth-century modern dance, including floor work and turn-in of the legs. The main distinction is that ballet technique is essential to perform a contemporary ballet. George Balanchine is considered to have been a pioneer of contemporary ballet. Another early contemporary ballet choreographer, Twyla Tharp , choreographed Push Comes To Shove for the American Ballet Theatre in 1976, and in 1986 created In The Upper Room for her own company. Both of these pieces were considered innovative for their melding of distinctly modern movements with the use of pointe shoes and classically trained dancers. Today there are many contemporary ballet companies and choreographers. These include Alonzo King and his company LINES Ballet ; Matthew Bourne and his company New Adventures ; Complexions Contemporary Ballet ; Nacho Duato and his Compañia Nacional de Danza ; William Forsythe and The Forsythe Company ; and Jiří Kylián of the Nederlands Dans Theater . Traditionally "classical" companies, such as the Mariinsky (Kirov) Ballet and the Paris Opera Ballet, also regularly perform contemporary works. The term ballet has evolved to include all forms associated with it. Someone training as a ballet dancer will now be expected to perform neoclassical, modern and contemporary work. A ballet dancer is expected to be able to be stately and regal for classical work, free and lyrical in neoclassical work, and unassuming, harsh or pedestrian for modern and contemporary work. In addition, there are several modern varieties of dance that fuse classical ballet technique with contemporary dance, such as Hiplet , that require dancers to be practised in non-Western dance styles. [17] Technical methods of ballet instruction There are six widely used, internationally recognized methods to teach or study ballet. These methods are the French School , the Vaganova Method , the Cecchetti Method , the Bournonville method , the Royal Academy of Dance method (English style), and the Balanchine method (American style). [18] [19] Many more schools of technique exist in various countries. Although preschool-age children are a lucrative source of income for a ballet studio, ballet instruction is generally not appropriate for young children. [20] [ failed verification ] Initial instruction requires standing still and concentrating on posture, rather than dancing. Because of this, many ballet programs have historically not accepted students until approximately age 8. Creative movement and non-demanding pre-ballet classes are recommended as alternatives for children. [21] [22] French method The French method is the basis of all ballet training. When Louis XIV created the Académie Royale de Danse in 1661, he helped to create the codified technique still used today by those in the profession, regardless of what method of training they adhere to. The French school was particularly revitalized under Rudolf Nureyev , in the 1980s. His influence revitalized and renewed appreciation for this style, and has drastically shaped ballet as a whole. [23] In fact, the French school is now sometimes referred to as Nureyev school. The French method is often characterized by technical precision, fluidity and gracefulness, and elegant, clean lines. For this style, fast footwork is often utilized in order to give the impression that the performers are drifting lightly across the stage. [24] Two important trademarks of this technique are the specific way in which the port de bras and the épaulement are performed, more rounded than when dancing in a Russian style, but not as rounded as the Danish style. [25] Vaganova method Agrippina Vaganova, "Esmeralda" 1910 The Vaganova method is a style of ballet training that emerged from Russian ballet , created by Agrippina Vaganova . After retiring from dance in 1916, Vaganova turned to teaching at the Leningrad Choreographic School in 1921. Her training method is now internationally recognized and her book, The Fundamentals of Classical Dance (1934), is a classic reference. This method is marked by the fusion of the classical French style, specifically elements from the Romantic era, with the athleticism of the Italian method, and the soulful passion of Russian ballet. [24] She developed an extremely precise method of instruction in her book Basic Principles of Russian Classical dance (1948). This includes outlining when to teach technical components to students in their ballet careers, for how long to focus on it, and the right amount of focus at each stage of the student's career. These textbooks continue to be extremely important to the instruction of ballet today. The method emphasizes development of strength, flexibility, and endurance for the proper performance of ballet. She espoused the belief that equal importance should be placed on the arms and legs while performing ballet, as this will bring harmony and greater expression to the body as a whole. [26] Cecchetti method Enrico Cecchetti with Anna Pavlova Developed by Enrico Cecchetti (1850–1928), this method is one known internationally for its intense reliance of the understanding of anatomy as it relates to classical ballet. The goal of this method is to instill important characteristics for the performance of ballet into students so that they do not need to rely on imitations of teachers. Important components for this method is the emphasis of balance, elevations, ballon , poise, and strength. This method espouses the importance of recognizing that all parts of the body move together to create beautiful, graceful lines, and as such cautions against thinking of ballet in terms of the arms, legs, and neck and torso as separate parts. This method is well known for eight port de bras that are utilized. [24] Bournonville method August Bournonville The Bournonville method is a Danish method first devised by August Bournonville . Bournonville was heavily influenced by the early French ballet method due to his training with his father, Antoine Bournonville and other important French ballet masters. This method has many style differences that differentiate it from other ballet methods taught today. [27] A key component is the use of diagonal épaulements, with the upper body turning towards the working foot typically. This method also incorporates very basic use of arms, pirouettes from a low développé position into seconde, and use of fifth position bras en bas for the beginning and end of movements. The Bournonville method produces dancers who have beautiful ballon ("the illusion of imponderable lightness" [28] ). The Royal Academy of Dance method (RAD) Young girls competing at the Royal Academy of Dancing (London) exams held in Brisbane and Toowoomba, 1938 The Royal Academy of Dance method , also referred to as the English style of ballet, was established in 1920 by Genee, Karsavina, Bedells, E Espinosa, and Richardson. The goal of this method is to promote academic training in classical ballet throughout Great Britain. This style also spread to the United States, and is widely utilized still today. There are specific grade levels which a student must move through in order to complete training in this method. [29] The key principle behind this method of instruction is that basic ballet technique must be taught at a slow pace, with difficulty progression often much slower than the rest of the methods. The idea behind this is if a student is to put in a large amount of effort into perfecting the basic steps, the technique learned in these steps allow a student to utilize harder ones at a much easier rate. [24] Balanchine method Suzanne Farrell and George Balanchine dancing in a segment of "Don Quixote" at New York State Theater Developed by George Balanchine at the New York City Ballet . His method draws heavily on his own training as a dancer in Russia. The technique is known for extreme speed throughout routines, emphasis on lines, and deep pliés. Perhaps one of the most well known differences of this style is the unorthodox positioning of the body. [24] Dancers of this style often have flexed hands and even feet, and are placed in off-balance positions. Important ballet studios teaching this method are the Miami City Ballet , Ballet Chicago Studio company, and the School of American Ballet in New York. [30] Costumes Anna Pavlova (prima ballerina). Early materials for ballet costumes were heavy, hindering the dancer's movements. Ballet costumes play an important role in the ballet community. They are often the only survival of a production, representing a living imaginary picture of the scene. [31] Renaissance and Baroque The roots of ballet go back to the Renaissance in France and Italy when court wear was the beginning of ballet costumes. Ballet costumes have been around since the early 15th century. Cotton and silk were mixed with flax, woven into semitransparent gauze [31] to create exquisite ballet costumes. 17th century During the 17th century, different types of fabrics and designs were used to make costumes more spectacular and eye catching. Court dress still remained for women during this century. Silks, satins and fabrics embroidered with real gold and precious stones increased the level of spectacular decoration associated with ballet costumes. [31] Women's costumes also consisted of heavy garments and knee-long skirts which made it difficult for them to create much movement and gesture. 18th century During the 18th century, stage costumes were still very similar to court wear but progressed over time, mostly due to the French dancer and ballet-master Jean-Georges Noverre (1727–1810) whose proposals to modernize ballet are contained in his revolutionary Lettres sur la danse et les ballets (1760). Noverre's book altered the emphasis in a production away from the costumes towards the physical movements and emotions of the dancers. European ballet was centered in the Paris Opera . [31] During this era, skirts were raised a few inches off the ground. Flowers, flounces, ribbons, and lace emphasized this opulent feminine style, as soft pastel tones in citron, peach, pink, and pistachio dominated the color range. [31] 19th century Olga Spessiva; Swan Lake Costume in the 20th century During the early 19th century, close-fitting body costumes, floral crowns, corsages, and jewels were used. Ideals of Romanticism were reflected through female movements. [31] Costumes became much tighter as corsets started to come into use, to show off the curves on a ballerina. Jewels and bedazzled costumes became much more popular. 20th century Maggie Gripenberg (in the middle) performing at the Finnish National Theatre in 1916 During the 20th century, ballet costumes transitioned back to the influence of Russian ballet. Ballerina skirts became knee-length tutus, later on in order to show off their precise pointe work. Colors used on stage costumes also became much more vibrant. Designers used colors such as red, orange, yellow, etc. to create visual expression when ballet dancers perform on stage. Ballet as a career Professional dancers are generally not well paid, and earn less money than a typical worker. [32] As of 2020, American dancers (including ballet and other dance forms) were paid an average of US$19 per hour, with pay somewhat better for teachers than for performers. [32] The job outlook is not strong, and the competition to get a job is intense, with the number of applicants vastly exceeding the number of job openings. [32] Most jobs involve teaching in private dance schools . [32] Choreographers are paid better than dancers. [32] Musicians and singers are paid better per hour than either dancers or choreographers, about US$30 per hour; however, full-time work is unusual for musicians. [33] Health effects Teenage girl ballet dancers are prone to stress fractures in the first rib . [34] Posterior ankle impingement syndrome (PAIS) most commonly affects people who perform repetitive plantar flexion , such as ballet dancers. [35] Eating disorders are thought to be common, and a 2014 meta-analysis suggests that studies do indicate that ballet dancers are at higher risk than the general population for several kinds of eating disorders. [36] In addition, some researchers have noted that intensive training in ballet results in lower bone mineral density in the arms. [37] Criticism Most ballet choreography is written so that it can only be performed by a relatively young dancer. [38] The structure of ballet – in which a (usually) male choreographer or director uses (mostly) women's bodies to express his artistic vision, has been criticized as harming women.[ by whom? ] [39] See also
Toggle the table of contents Modern dance From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of western concert or theatrical dance Martha Graham in 1948 Modern dance is a broad genre of western concert or theatrical dance which includes dance styles such as ballet, folk, ethnic, religious, and social dancing; and primarily arose out of Europe and the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. It was considered to have been developed as a rejection of, or rebellion against, classical ballet , and also a way to express social concerns like socioeconomic and cultural factors. [1] [2] [3] In the late 19th century, modern dance artists such as Isadora Duncan , Maud Allan , and Loie Fuller were pioneering new forms and practices in what is now called improvisational or free dance . These dancers disregarded ballet's strict movement vocabulary (the particular, limited set of movements that were considered proper to ballet) and stopped wearing corsets and pointe shoes in the search for greater freedom of movement. [3] Throughout the 20th century, sociopolitical concerns, major historical events, and the development of other art forms contributed to the continued development of modern dance in the United States and Europe. Moving into the 1960s, new ideas about dance began to emerge as a response to earlier dance forms and to social changes. Eventually, postmodern dance artists would reject the formalism of modern dance, and include elements such as performance art , contact improvisation , release technique , and improvisation. [3] [4] American modern dance can be divided (roughly) into three periods or eras. In the Early Modern period ( c. 1880–1923), characterized by the work of Isadora Duncan, Loie Fuller, Ruth St. Denis , Ted Shawn , and Eleanor King , artistic practice changed radically, but clearly distinct modern dance techniques had not yet emerged. In the Central Modern period ( c. 1923–1946), choreographers Martha Graham , Doris Humphrey , Katherine Dunham , Charles Weidman , and Lester Horton sought to develop distinctively American movement styles and vocabularies, and developed clearly defined and recognizable dance training systems. In the Late Modern period ( c. 1946–1957), José Limón , Pearl Primus , Merce Cunningham , Talley Beatty , Erick Hawkins , Anna Sokolow , Anna Halprin , and Paul Taylor introduced clear abstractionism and avant-garde movements, and paved the way for postmodern dance . [5] Modern dance has evolved with each subsequent generation of participating artists. Artistic content has morphed and shifted from one choreographer to another, as have styles and techniques. Artists such as Graham and Horton developed techniques in the Central Modern Period that are still taught worldwide and numerous other types of modern dance exist today. [1] [2] Background[ edit ] Modern dance is often considered to have emerged as a rejection of, or rebellion against, classical ballet , although historians have suggested that socioeconomic changes in both the United States and Europe helped to initiate shifts in the dance world. In America, increasing industrialization , the rise of a middle class (which had more disposable income and free time), and the decline of Victorian social strictures led to, among other changes, a new interest in health and physical fitness. [6] "It was in this atmosphere that a 'new dance' was emerging as much from a rejection of social structures as from a dissatisfaction with ballet." [7] During that same period, "the champions of physical education helped to prepare the way for modern dance, and gymnastic exercises served as technical starting points for young women who longed to dance." [8] Women's colleges began offering "aesthetic dance" courses by the end of the 1880s. [9] Emil Rath , who wrote at length about this emerging art form at the time stated, "Music and rhythmic bodily movement are twin sisters of art, as they have come into existence simultaneously...today we see in the artistic work of Isadora Duncan, Maud Allan, and others the use of a form of dancing which strives to portray in movements what the music master expresses in his compositions—interpretative dancing." [10] Main article: Free dance Isadora Duncan (born in 1877) was a predecessor of modern dance with her stress on the center or torso, bare feet, loose hair, free-flowing costumes, and incorporation of humor into emotional expression . She was inspired by classical Greek arts, folk dances, social dances, nature, natural forces, and new American athleticism such as skipping, running, jumping, leaping, and abrupt movements. She thought that ballet was ugly and meaningless gymnastics. Although she returned to the United States at various points in her life, her work was not well received there. She returned to Europe and died in Nice in 1927. [1] [2] [3] [11] Loie Fuller (born in 1862) was a burlesque "skirt" dancer experimenting with the effect that gas lighting had on her silk costumes. Fuller developed a form of natural movement and improvisation techniques that were used in conjunction with her revolutionary lighting equipment and translucent silk costumes. She patented her apparatus and methods of stage lighting, that included the use of coloured gels and burning chemicals for luminescence, and her voluminous silk stage costumes. [1] [2] [3] Ruth St. Denis (born in 1879) influenced by the actress Sarah Bernhardt and Japanese dancer Sada Yacco , developed her translations of Indian culture and mythology . Her performances quickly became popular and she toured extensively while researching Asian culture and arts. [3] Expressionist and early modern dance in Europe[ edit ] Dancer at the Laban school , Berlin 1929 Radical dance[ edit ] Disturbed by the Great Depression and the rising threat of fascism in Europe, the radical dancers tried to raise consciousness by dramatizing the economic , social , ethnic and political crises of their time. Hanya Holm - A student of Mary Wigman and an instructor at the Wigman School in Dresden , founded the New York Wigman School of Dance in 1931 (which became the Hanya Holm Studio in 1936) introducing Wigman technique, Rudolf Laban 's theories of spatial dynamics, and later her own dance techniques to American modern dance. An accomplished choreographer, she was a founding artist of the first American Dance Festival in Bennington (1934). Holm's dance work Metropolitan Daily was the first modern dance composition to be televised on NBC and her labanotation score for Kiss Me, Kate (1948) was the first choreography to be copyrighted in the United States . Holm choreographed extensively in the fields of concert dance and musical theater . [3] [13] Anna Sokolow - A student of Martha Graham and Louis Horst, Sokolow created her own dance company ( c. 1930). Presenting dramatic contemporary imagery, Sokolow's compositions were generally abstract, often revealing the full spectrum of human experience reflecting the tension and alienation of the time and the truth of human movement. [1] [3] José Limón - In 1946, after studying and performing with Doris Humphrey and Charles Weidman, Limón established his own company with Humphrey as artistic director. It was under her mentorship that Limón created his signature dance The Moor's Pavane (1949). Limón's choreographic works and technique remain a strong influence on contemporary dance practice. [14] Merce Cunningham - A former ballet student and performer with Martha Graham, he presented his first New York solo concert with John Cage in 1944. Influenced by Cage and embracing modernist ideology using postmodern processes, Cunningham introduced chance procedures and pure movement to choreography and Cunningham technique to the cannon of 20th-century dance techniques. Cunningham set the seeds for postmodern dance with his non-linear, non-climactic, non-psychological abstract work. In these works each element is in and of itself expressive, and the observer (in large part) determines what it communicates. [3] Erick Hawkins - A student of George Balanchine , became a soloist and the first male dancer in Martha Graham's dance company. In 1951, Hawkins, interested in the new field of kinesiology , opened his own school and developed his own technique (Hawkins technique) a forerunner of most somatic dance techniques. [15] [16] Paul Taylor - A student of the Juilliard School of Music and the Connecticut College School of Dance. In 1952 his performance at the American Dance Festival attracted the attention of several major choreographers. Performing in the companies of Merce Cunningham , Martha Graham , and George Balanchine (in that order), he founded the Paul Taylor Dance Company in 1954. The use of everyday gestures and modernist ideology is characteristic of his choreography. Former members of the Paul Taylor Dance Company included Twyla Tharp , Laura Dean, Dan Wagoner, and Senta Driver. [17] Alwin Nikolais - A student of Hanya Holm . Nikolais use of multimedia in works such as Masks, Props, and Mobiles (1953), Totem (1960), and Count Down (1979) was unmatched by other choreographers. Often presenting his dancers in constrictive spaces and costumes with complicated sound and sets, he focused their attention on the physical tasks of overcoming obstacles he placed in their way. Nikolais viewed the dancer not as an artist of self-expression, but as a talent who could investigate the properties of physical space and movement. [18] In the United States[ edit ] Early modern dance[ edit ] Martha Graham and Bertram Ross in 1961; photo by Carl van Vechten In 1915, Ruth St. Denis founded the Denishawn school and dance company with her husband Ted Shawn . [19] Martha Graham , Doris Humphrey , and Charles Weidman were pupils at the school and members of the dance company. Seeking a wider and more accepting audience for their work, Duncan, Fuller, and Ruth St. Denis toured Europe . Martha Graham is often regarded as the founding mother of modern 20th-century concert dance . [20] Graham viewed ballet as too one-sided: European , imperialistic , and un-American. [21] She became a student at the Denishawn school in 1916 and then moved to New York City in 1923, where she performed in musical comedies , music halls , and worked on her own choreography . [22] Graham developed her own dance technique , Graham technique , that hinged on concepts of contraction and release. [20] In Graham's teachings, she wanted her students to "Feel". To "Feel", means having a heightened sense of awareness of being grounded to the floor while, at the same time, feeling the energy throughout your entire body, extending it to the audience. [23] Her principal contributions to dance are the focus of the 'center' of the body (as contrast to ballet's emphasis on limbs), coordination between breathing and movement , and a dancer's relationship with the floor. [22] Popularization[ edit ] In 1927, newspapers regularly began assigning dance critics, such as Walter Terry, and Edwin Denby , who approached performances from the viewpoint of a movement specialist rather than as a reviewer of music or drama. Educators accepted modern dance into college and university curricula, first as a part of physical education, then as performing art. Many college teachers were trained at the Bennington Summer School of the Dance, established at Bennington College in 1934. Of the Bennington program, Agnes de Mille wrote, "...there was a fine commingling of all kinds of artists, musicians, and designers, and secondly, because all those responsible for booking the college concert series across the continent were assembled there. ... free from the limiting strictures of the three big monopolistic managements, who pressed for preference of their European clients. As a consequence, for the first time American dancers were hired to tour America nationwide, and this marked the beginning of their solvency." [24] African American[ edit ] Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater perform "Revelations" in 2011. African American dance blended modern dance with African and Caribbean movement (flexible torso and spine, articulated pelvis, isolation of the limbs, and polyrhythmic movement). Katherine Dunham trained in ballet, founded Ballet Negre in 1936 and then the Katherine Dunham Dance Company based in Chicago . In 1945, she opened a school in New York, teaching Katherine Dunham Technique, African and Caribbean movement integrated with ballet and modern dance. [25] [26] Taking inspiration from African-based dance where one part of the body plays against one another, she focused on articulating the torso in her choreography. Pearl Primus drew on African and Caribbean dances to create strong dramatic works characterized by large leaps. She often based her dances on the work of black writers and on racial issues, such as Langston Hughes 's 1944 The Negro Speaks of Rivers , and Lewis Allan's 1945 Strange Fruit (1945). Her dance company developed into the Pearl Primus Dance Language Institute. [27] Alvin Ailey studied under Lester Horton , Bella Lewitzky , and later Martha Graham. He spent several years working in both concert and theater dance. In 1958, Ailey and a group of young African-American dancers performed as the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater in New York . He drew upon his "blood memories" of Texas , the blues, spirituals and gospel as inspiration. His most popular and critically acclaimed work is Revelations (1960). [28] [29] [30] Legacy of modern dance[ edit ] The legacy of modern dance can be seen in lineage of 20th-century concert dance forms. Although often producing divergent dance forms, many seminal dance artists share a common heritage that can be traced back to free dance. Main article: Postmodern dance Postmodern dance developed in the 1960s in United States when society questioned truths and ideologies in politics and art . This period was marked by social and cultural experimentation in the arts. Choreographers no longer created specific 'schools' or 'styles'. The influences from different periods of dance became more vague and fragmented. [20] Main article: Contemporary dance Danceworks rehearsal of "Stone Soup" in 2011 with semi-improvised music from composer Seth Warren-Crow and Apple iLife sound clip "Tour Bus" Contemporary dance emerged in the 1950s as the dance form that is combining the modern dance elements and the classical ballet elements. [31] It can use elements from non-Western dance cultures, such as African dancing with bent knees as a characteristic trait, and Butoh , Japanese contemporary dancing that developed in the 1950s. [20] [32] It incorporates modern European influences, via the work of pioneers like Isadora Duncan. [33] According to Treva Bedinghaus, "Modern dancers use dancing to express their innermost emotions, often to get closer to their inner-selves. Before attempting to choreograph a routine, the modern dancer decides which emotions to try to convey to the audience. Many modern dancers choose a subject near and dear to their hearts, such as a lost love or a personal failure. The dancer will choose music that relates to the story they wish to tell, or choose to use no music at all, and then choose a costume to reflect their chosen emotions." [34] Teachers and their students[ edit ] This list illustrates some important teacher-student relationships in modern dance. Rudolf von Laban and pupils at his dance school, Berlin 1929
Toggle the table of contents Contemporary dance From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of dance performance A dancer performing a contemporary dance piece Indian Contemporary Dancer at 2018 Folklorama Festival, Winnipeg Contemporary dance [1] is a genre of dance performance that developed during the mid-twentieth century and has since grown to become one of the dominant genres for formally trained dancers throughout the world, with particularly strong popularity in the U.S. and Europe. Although originally informed by and borrowing from classical , modern , and jazz styles, it has come to incorporate elements from many styles of dance. [2] Due to its technical similarities, it is often perceived to be closely related to modern dance, ballet, and other classical concert dance styles. In terms of the focus of its technique, contemporary dance tends to combine the strong but controlled legwork of ballet with modern that stresses on torso. It also employs contract-release, floor work , fall and recovery, and improvisation characteristics of modern dance. [3] Unpredictable changes in rhythm, speed, and direction are often used, as well. Additionally, contemporary dance sometimes incorporates elements of non-western dance cultures, such as elements from African dance including bent knees, or movements from the Japanese contemporary dance, Butoh . [4] [5] Main article: Modern dance Contemporary dance performed by Le Sacre Contemporary dance draws on both classical ballet and modern dance, whereas postmodern dance was a direct and opposite response to modern dance. Merce Cunningham is considered to be the first choreographer to "develop an independent attitude towards modern dance" and defy the ideas that were established by it. [5] [6] In 1944 Cunningham accompanied his dance with music by John Cage , who observed that Cunningham's dance "no longer relies on linear elements (...) nor does it rely on a movement towards and away from climax. As in abstract painting , it is assumed that an element (a movement, a sound , a change of light) is in and of itself expressive; what it communicates is in large part determined by the observer themselves." Cunningham formed the Merce Cunningham Dance Company in 1953 and went on to create more than one hundred and fifty works for the company, many of which have been performed internationally by ballet and modern dance companies . Cunningham's key ideas[ edit ] Cunningham's key ideas include- Contemporary dance does refuse the classical ballet's leg technique in favour of modern dance's stress on the torso Contemporary dance is not necessarily narrative form of art Choreography that appears disordered, but nevertheless relies on technique Unpredictable changes in rhythm, speed, and direction Multiple and simultaneous actions Suspension of perspective and symmetry in ballet scenic frame perspective such as front, center, and hierarchies Creative freedom Independence between dance and music Dance to be danced, not analyzed
Toggle the table of contents Street dance For other uses, see Street Dance (disambiguation) . Vernacular dance in an urban context Two street dancers performing in the URBANOS Dance Contest in Brazil. Street dance is an umbrella term for a large number of social dance styles such as: breakdancing , popping , locking , house dance , waacking , voguing etc. Social dance styles have many accompanying steps and foundations, created organically from a culture, a moment in time, a way of life, influenced by natural social interaction. [1] A street dance is a vernacular dance in an urban context. [2] Vernacular dances are often improvisational and social in nature, encouraging interaction and contact with spectators and other dancers. These dances are a part of the vernacular culture of the geographical area that they come from. History[ edit ] Street dance evolved during the 1970s outside dance studios in any available open space. This includes streets, dance parties, block parties , parks, school yards, raves , and nightclubs. This is partly because African American and Latino people who created the style were generally not accepted into dance studios because of their race. A significant feature of street dance is that it was historically a dance of young people offering a sense of freedom and giving a 'voice' to unrepresented communities. [3] Due to the mix of styles within street dance, its origin can not be traced to one precise area, however, America is the birthplace of most street styles. Breakdance originated in the Bronx and Lite Feet emerged in Harlem, both in New York City , [4] [3] [5] while popping and locking developed during the 1970s funk era in California , USA. Clogging , which evolved in the streets and factories of Northern England in the mid-19th century, is an early form of street dance. [6]
List Representative Tango is a partner dance and social dance that originated in the 1880s along the Río de la Plata , the natural border between Argentina and Uruguay . The tango was born in the impoverished port areas of these countries from a combination of Argentine Milonga , Spanish-Cuban Habanera , and Uruguayan Candombe celebrations. [1] It was frequently practiced in the brothels and bars of ports, where business owners employed bands to entertain their patrons. [2] It then spread to the rest of the world. [3] Many variations of this dance currently exist around the world. On August 31, 2009, UNESCO approved a joint proposal by Argentina and Uruguay to include the tango in the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists . [4] [5] Main article: History of the tango The origin and spread of tango Tango is a dance that has influences from African and European culture. [6] [7] Dances from the candombe ceremonies of former African enslaved people helped shape the modern day tango. The dance originated in working-class districts of Buenos Aires and Montevideo . The music derived from the fusion of various forms of music from Europe. [8] The words "tango" and "tambo" around the River Plate basin were initially used to refer to musical gatherings of slaves, with written records of colonial authorities attempting to ban such gatherings as early as 1789. [9] Initially, it was just one of the many dances, but it soon[ when? ] became popular throughout society, as theatres and street barrel organs spread it from the suburbs to the working-class slums, which were packed with hundreds of thousands of European immigrants . [10] When the tango began to spread internationally around 1900, cultural norms were generally conservative, and so tango dancing was widely regarded as extremely sexual and inappropriate for public display. This led to a phenomenon of culture shock . Additionally, the combination of African, Native American and European cultural influences in tango was new and unusual to most of the Western world . [11] Many neighbourhoods of Buenos Aires have their particular tango histories: for example La Boca , San Telmo and Boedo . At Boedo Avenue, Cátulo Castillo , Homero Manzi and other singers and composers used to meet at the Japanese Cafe with the Boedo Group .[ citation needed ] El Tango by Uruguayan painter Pedro Figari In the early years of the 20th century, dancers and orchestras from Buenos Aires travelled to Europe, and the first European tango craze took place in Paris , soon followed by London , Berlin , and other capitals. Tango historian Nardo Zalko , a native of Buenos Aires who lived most of his life in Paris, investigated the mutual fertilization between the two cities in his work, Paris – Buenos Aires, Un Siècle de Tango ("A Century of Tango"). [12] Towards the end of 1913, it hit New York City as well as Finland . In the U.S. , around 1911, the word " tango " was often applied to dances in a 24 or 44 rhythm such as the one-step . The term was fashionable and did not indicate that tango steps would be used in the dance, although they might be. Tango music was sometimes played but at a rather fast tempo. Instructors of the period would sometimes refer to this as a "North American tango", versus the so-called "Argentine tango". The tango was controversial because of its perceived sexual overtones and, by the end of 1913, the dance teachers who had introduced the dance to Paris were banished from the city. [13] By 1914, more authentic tango stylings were soon developed,[ which? ] along with some variations like Albert Newman's "Minuet" tango. In Argentina, the onset in 1929 of the Great Depression , and restrictions introduced after the overthrow of the Hipólito Yrigoyen government in 1930, caused a temporary decline in tango's popularity. Its fortunes were reversed later in the 1930s, and tango again became widely fashionable and a matter of national pride under the first Perón government, which in turn had a major effect on Argentinian culture overall. Mariano Mores played a role in the resurgence of the tango in 1950s Argentina. Mores's Taquito Militar was premiered in 1952 during a governmental speech by President Juan D. Perón, which generated a strong political and cultural controversy between different views of the concepts of "cultured" music and "popular" music, as well as the links between both "cultures".[ citation needed ] [14] Tango declined again in the late 1950s, as a result of economic depression and the banning of public gatherings by the military dictatorships ; male-only tango practice—the custom at the time—was considered "public gathering". That, indirectly, boosted the popularity of rock and roll because, unlike tango, it did not require such gatherings. [15] However, in the late 1980s the tango again experienced a resurgence in Argentina, partly due to the endeavors of Osvaldo Peredo . [16] Etymology[ edit ] Look up tango in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. There are several theories regarding the origin of the word tango, none of which has been proven. [18] An African culture is often credited as the creator of this word; in particular, it is theorized that the word derives from the Yoruba word shangó , which refers to Shango , the God of Thunder in traditional Yoruba religion . [19] This theory suggests that the word “shangó” was morphed through the dilution of the Nigerian language once it reached South America via slave trade . According to an alternative theory, tango is derived from the Spanish word for " drum ", tambor . [19] This word was then mispronounced by Buenos Aires’ lower-class inhabitants to become tambo, ultimately resulting in the common tango. It is also sometimes theorized that the word is derived from the Portuguese word tanger , which means "to play a musical instrument". Another Portuguese word, tangomão , a combination of the verb tanger ("to touch") with the noun mão ("hand") meaning "to play a musical instrument with one's hands", has been suggested as the etymon of tango. [20] According to some authors, tango is derived from the Kongo word ntangu which means "sun", "hour", "space-time". [21] [7] [22]
Not to be confused with Salsa (food) . Salsa training in Ecuador Salsa is a Latin dance , associated with salsa music , which was first popularized in the United States during the 1960s in New York City. [1] [2] Salsa is a mixture of Cuban dances, such as mambo , pachanga , and rumba , as well as American dances such as swing and tap . [3] Origin[ edit ] Salsa is one of the most popular types Latin dances that is practiced worldwide. [4] The term "salsa" was coined by Johnny Pacheco in the 1960s in New York, as an umbrella term for Cuban dance music being played in the city at the time. [5] Salsa as a dance emerged soon after, being a combination of mambo (which was popular in New York in the 1950s) as well as Latin dances such as Son and Rumba as well as American dances such as swing, hustle, and tap. [6] Like many other forms of Latin dances, salsa may trace its roots back to Cuba, where it is widely accepted that early radio is responsible for American artists to begin incorporating elements of Latin American rhythms into their own music and eventually into their own styles of dance. [7] As salsa music spread to other countries, different styles emerged such as Cuban and Colombian salsa . Salsa remains popular globally with enthnographic research into salsa having been done as far as Benin, and Ghana. [8] [9] Description[ edit ] Salsa dance steps can be done individually, but Salsa is most popularly known as a partnered dance where the lead takes the follower through a series of spins and turn patterns to music. Salsa's tempo ranges from about 150bpm ( beats per minute ) to around 250bpm, although most dancing is done to music somewhere between 160 and 220bpm. [10] The basic Salsa dance rhythm consists of taking three steps for every four beats of music. Salsa dancers can also break apart to dance solo, known as "shines". The two main styles of partnered salsa dancing are linear and circular. In linear salsa, dance couples remain in their "slot," with each dancer switching places from one side of the slot to the other, similar to West Coast Swing— New York–style salsa and LA-style salsa are both danced this way. The second style of partnered salsa dancing is circular salsa. Here, dancers circle around each other, reminiscent of East Coast Swing. Both Cuban and Colombian salsa follow this circular pattern. Incorporating other dance styling techniques into salsa dancing has become very common for both men and women: foot work, arm work, body movement, spins, body isolations, shoulder shimmies, body rolls, hand styling, acrobatics, and even lifts. [11] Venues[ edit ] Salsa dance socials are commonly held in night clubs, bars, ballrooms, restaurants, and outside, especially if part of an outdoor festival. Salsa dancing is an international dance that can be found in most metropolitan cities in the world. [12] Festivals are held annually, often called a "Salsa Congress," in various host cities aimed to attract a variety of salsa dancers from other cities and countries. The events bring dancers together to share their passion for the dance, build community, and share moves and tips. These events usually include salsa dance performers, live salsa music, workshops, open dancing, and contests.  On the other hand, Salsa dancing is also done in very informal settings, such as parties in a home or backyard.  Salsa dancing is often seen as an important cultural expression by persons living in certain Hispanic regions or people whose family heritage comes from those regions. International Salsa Congress, 2004 at Bangalore Video demonstrating salsa dancing fundamentals Over the years, many different styles of salsa dancing have evolved around the world. [13] Many of them are compatible with each other, but others are different enough to make dancing between dancers of different styles difficult. Salsa has many similarities with other partner dances, the styles and skills learned in salsa can be applied to another Latin dance like Bachata. [14] Incorporating other dance styling techniques into salsa dancing has also become common, with dancers of one style incorporating styles and movements of others to create new fusions of dance styles. New York style[ edit ] "On 2" style salsa originated in New York and is often referred to as New York style. It is a linear form of salsa, where dancers dance in a slot, similar to LA style salsa. Unlike other styles of salsa, however, New York style is danced on the second beat of the music ("on 2"), and the follower, not the leader, steps forward on the first measure of the music. There is also often a greater emphasis on performing "shines" in which dancers separate themselves and dance solo with intricate footwork and styling— a phenomenon that likely has origins from Swing and New York Tap. One of the most influential figures in New York style salsa is Eddie Torres (known as "the Mambo King"), who is credited with helping to formalize the on 2 salsa timing (based on mambo ) and helping to popularize it by teaching it in dance studios in New York and through early instructional tapes. New York style salsa emphasizes harmony with the percussive instruments in salsa music, such as the congas, timbales, and clave, since many or all of those instruments often mark the second beat in the music. Los Angeles style[ edit ] Basic step for LA style, with leader's steps in blue Salsa show dancing Los Angeles style salsa (LA style) is danced "on 1" where dancers break forward on the first beat of the music , in contrast to New York style which is danced on 2. LA style salsa is danced in a line or "slot" with dancers exchanging positions throughout the dance, unlike Cuban salsa which is danced in a more circular fashion. The two essential elements of this dance are the forward–backward basic step and the cross-body lead. In this pattern, the leader steps forward on 1, steps to the right on 2-3 while turning 90 degrees counter-clockwise (facing to the left), leaving the slot open. The follower then steps straight forward on 5-6 and turns on 7–8, while the leader makes another 90 degrees counter-clockwise and slightly forward, coming back into the slot. In total, the couple turned 180° with the follower and leader switching places. The "Vazquez Brothers" (Luis Vazquez, Francisco Vazquez, and Johnny Vazquez) are credited for the early development and growth of LA Style. [15] Luiz Vazquez was the co-founder of Los Angeles's first salsa dance team, Salsa Brava. The Vazquez Brothers drew influence from stage dances such as tap dance and helped develop LA style's reputation for flashy moves and acrobatics. Other prominent figures in LA style salsa include salsa promoter Albert Torres , who created the LA Salsa Congress, the first salsa congress in the United States and for many years one of the largest salsa events in the world. Later dancers such as Alex Da Silva , Christian Oviedo, and Liz Lira are also credited with developing the LA style of dancing as we know it today.[ citation needed ] Cuban style / Casino[ edit ] Main article: Cuban salsa In Cuba, a popular dance known as Casino was marketed as Cuban-style salsa or Salsa Cubana abroad to distinguish it from other salsa styles when the name was popularized internationally in the 1970s. Dancing Casino is an expression of popular social culture; Cubans consider casino as part of social and cultural activities centering on their popular music. The name Casino is derived from the Spanish term for the dance halls, "Casinos Deportivos" where much social dancing was done among the better-off, white Cubans during the mid-20th century and onward. Historically, Casino traces its origin as a partner dance from Cuban Son , Cha Cha Cha, Danzón and Guaracha. Traditionally, Casino is danced "a contratiempo". This means that no step is taken on the first and fifth beats in each clave pattern and the fourth and eighth beat are emphasized. In this way, rather than following a beat, the dancers themselves contribute in their movement, to the polyrhythmic pattern of the music. At the same time, it is often danced "a tiempo", although both "on3" (originally) and "on1" (nowadays). What distinguishes this style is the understanding and spontaneous use of Afro-Cuban dance vocabulary within a "Casino" dance. In the same way that a "sonero" (lead singer in Son and salsa bands) will "quote" other, older songs in their own, a "casino" dancer will frequently improvise references to other dances, integrating movements, gestures and extended passages from folk dances. This is particularly true of African descended Cubans. Such improvisations might include extracts of rumba, dances for African deities, the older popular dances such as Cha Cha Chá and Danzon as well as anything the dancer may feel. Miami-style Casino[ edit ] Developed by Cuban immigrants to Florida and centered on Miami, this dance style is a fusion of Casino and elements from American culture and dances. The major difference that distinguishes the Miami-style from other North American styles is the "Atras" or "Diagonal", back breaking steps performed backwards diagonally instead of moving forwards and backwards as seen in the New York style.  Dancers do not shift their body weight greatly as seen in other styles. Instead, dancers keep their upper body still, poised and relaxed, focusing on foot movement. The dancer breaks mostly On1. A major difference between Cali Style and Miami-style is the latter is exclusively danced on the downbeat (On1) and has elements of shines and show-style added to it, following repertoires of North American styles. Miami-style has many adherents, particularly Cuban-Americans and other Latinos based in South Florida. [16] Rueda de Casino[ edit ] Main article: Rueda de Casino In the 1950s, Salsa Rueda or more accurately Rueda de Casino was developed in Havana , Cuba . Pairs of dancers form a circle ("Rueda" in Spanish means "Wheel"), with dance moves called out by one person. Many of the moves involve rapidly swapping partners. "Rueda de Cuba" is original type of Rueda, originating from Cuba. It is not as formal as Rueda de Miami and consists of about 30 calls.[ citation needed ] It was codified in the 1970s.[ citation needed ] "Rueda de Miami" originated in the 1980s from Miami, is a formal style with many rules based on a mix, and is a hybridization of Rueda de Cuba & North American dance styles, with some routines reflecting American culture (e.g. Coca-Cola, Dedo, Adios) which is not found in the traditional Cuban-style Rueda. Colombian / Cali style[ edit ] Cali-Style Salsa, also known as Colombian Salsa and Salsa Caleña, is based around the Colombian City of Cali . Cali is also known as the "Capital de la Salsa" (Salsa's Capital); due to salsa music being the main genre in parties, nightclubs and festivals in the 21st century. It is also worth noting that Cali's style of Salsa has been heavily influenced by the nature of its social scene, where in the 90's most nightclubs, named Disoctecas after the record discs used to play older Salsa music, had a period of time where they would transform into a Viejoteca, a nickname for point of time in which nightclubs would play the Salsa equivalent of Golden Oldies. [17] The elements of Cali-Style Salsa were strongly influenced by dances to Caribbean rhythms which preceded salsa, such as Pachanga and Boogaloo . Cali has the highest number of salsa schools and salsa teams in the world. Many of the competitions are held in Colombia. [18] The central feature is the footwork which has quick rapid steps and skipping motions called "repique". Colombian style may execute Cross-body Leads or the "Dile Que No" as seen in other styles, but would rather step in place and displace in closed position. They include various acrobats such as partnered flips to entertain with these jaw dropping stunts. Their footwork is intricate and precise, helping several Colombian Style dancers win major world championships. Cali hosts many annual salsa events such as the World Salsa Cali Festival and the Encuentro de Melomanos y Coleccionistas. Research situated in salsa dancing[ edit ] Academic researchers have used salsa dancing as a productive research site in the social and natural sciences . For example, researchers in the natural sciences studied the mathematics of salsa dancing moves. [19] In the social sciences, researchers have studied salsa dancing to understand, for example how the Latino identity is connected to salsa dancing. [20] The study of salsa dancing has been studied as a metaphor to understand emotional and cultural economies . [21] Salsa dancing has been shown to manifest "moments of luxury" in which people use hedonistic escapism to leave momentarily the constrains of ordinary normal life. [22] and, researchers have also used salsa dancing to study the ephemerality of social groups. [23] Salsa music – the music to which salsa is danced Mambo – a dance style which heavily influenced salsa dancing Palladium Ballroom – a New York City venue that helped popularize Latin music and dance during the 1940s and 1950s Rhumba – a ballroom dance that heavily influenced salsa World Salsa Championships – a list of international competitions for salsa dancing Cuban salsa – a popular form of salsa dancing from Cuba
Cultural Origins[ edit ] There are hypotheses that point to the influence on flamenco of types of dance from the Indian subcontinent; the place of origin of the Romani people . [1] The Indo-Pakistani scales of Flamenco were introduced to Andalusia by the Romani migrations from Northern India . [15] These Roma migrants also brought bells, and an extensive repertoire of songs and dances.[ citation needed ] Upon arrival to Andalusia in the 15th century, they were exposed to the rich Arab-Andalusian music culture, itself a hybrid of Spanish music tradition going back to the 8th century with the establishment of Al-Andalus , which brought in traditions and music from the Arabian peninsula , Northern Africa and Sephardic features. Some of the instruments associated with Flamenco and Spanish folklore in different regions today, are the wooden castanets and tambourines , both believed to originate during the Al Andalus period. [16] [17] This centuries-long period of cultural intermingling, formed the roots of Flamenco song and dance genres. [18] [19] Birth of Flamenco[ edit ] It is believed that the flamenco genre emerged at the end of the 18th century in cities and agrarian towns of Baja Andalusia, highlighting Jerez de la Frontera as the first written vestige of this art, although there is practically no data related to those dates and the manifestations of this time are more typical of the bolero school than of flamenco. It appeared as a modern art form from the convergence of the urban subaltern groups, Gitano communities, and journeyman of Andalusia that formed the marginalized Flamenco artistic working class who established Flamenco as a singular art form, marked from the beginning by the Gitano brand. [13] Andalusia was the origin and cradle of the early Flamenco cantaores and of the three or four dozen Gitano families who created and cultivated Flamenco. [20] The casticismo[ edit ] During the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century, a number of factors led to rise in Spain of a phenomenon known as "Costumbrismo Andaluz" or "Andalusian Mannerism". In 1783 Carlos III promulgated a pragmatics that regulated the social situation of the Gitanos . [21] This was a momentous event in the history of Spanish gitanos who, after centuries of marginalization and persecution, saw their legal situation improve substantially. After the Spanish War of Independence (1808–1812), a feeling of racial pride developed in the Spanish conscience, in opposition to the "gallified" "Afrancesados" - Spaniards who were influenced by French culture and the idea of the enlightenment. In this context, gitanos were seen as an ideal embodiment of Spanish culture and the emergence of the bullfighting schools of Ronda and Seville , the rise of the Bandidos and Vaqueros led to a taste for Andalusian romantic culture which triumphed in the Madrid court. At this time there is evidence of disagreements due to the introduction of innovations in art. [22] Los cafés cantantes[ edit ] "Café cantante" in Seville, Spain, c.1888. Photograph by Emilio Beauchy aka "E. Beauchy" In 1881 Silverio Franconetti opened the first flamenco singer café in Seville. In Silverio's café the cantaores were in a very competitive environment, which allowed the emergence of the professional cantaor and served as a crucible where flamenco art was configured. Locals learned the cantes, while reinterpreting the Andalusian folk songs in their own style, expanding the repertoire. Likewise, the taste of the public contributed to configure the flamenco genre, unifying its technique and its theme. The antiflamenquismo of " La generación del 98 "[ edit ] Flamenquismo, defined by the Royal Spanish Academy as a "fondness for flamenco art and customs", is a conceptual catch-all where flamenco singing and a fondness for bullfighting, among other traditional Spanish elements, fit. These customs were strongly attacked by the generation of 98, all of its members being "anti-flamenco", with the exception of the Machado brothers, Manuel and Antonio. Being Sevillians and sons of the folklorist Demófilo Machado, the brothers had a more complex view of the matter. The greatest standard bearer of anti-flamenquism was the Madrid writer Eugenio Noel, who, in his youth, had been a militant casticista. Noel attributed to flamenco and bullfighting the origin of the ills of Spain which he saw as manifestations of the country's Oriental character which hindered economic and social development. These considerations caused an insurmountable rift to be established for decades between flamenco and most "intellectuals" of the time. The flamenca opera[ edit ] Between 1920 and 1955, flamenco shows began to be held in bullrings and theaters, under the name "flamenco opera". This denomination was an economic strategy of the promoters, since opera only paid 3% while variety shows paid 10%. At this time, flamenco shows spread throughout Spain and the main cities of the world. The great social and commercial success achieved by flamenco at this time eliminated some of the oldest and most sober styles from the stage, in favor of lighter airs, such as cantiñas , los cantes de ida y vuelta and fandangos , of which many personal versions were created. The purist critics attacked this lightness of the cantes, as well as the use of falsete and the gaitero style. In the line of purism, the poet Federico García Lorca and the composer Manuel de Falla had the idea of concurso de cante jondo en Granada en 1922. [23] Both artists conceived of flamenco as folklore, not as a scenic artistic genre; for this reason, they were concerned, since they believed that the massive triumph of flamenco would end its purest and deepest roots. To remedy this, they organized a cante jondo contest in which only amateurs could participate and in which festive cantes (such as cantiñas) were excluded, which Falla and Lorca did not consider jondos, but flamencos. The jury was chaired by Antonio Chacón, who at that time was the leading figure in cante. The winners were "El Tenazas", a retired professional cantaor from Morón de la Frontera, and Manuel Ortega, an eight-year-old boy from Seville who would go down in flamenco history as Manolo Caracol. The contest turned out to be a failure due to the scant echo it had and because Lorca and Falla did not know how to understand the professional character that flamenco already had at that time, striving in vain to seek a purity that never existed in an art that was characterized by mixture and the personal innovation of its creators. Apart from this failure, with the Generation of '27 , whose most eminent members were Andalusians and therefore knew the genre first-hand, the recognition of flamenco by intellectuals began. At that time, there were already flamenco recordings related to Christmas, which can be divided into two groups: the traditional flamenco carol and flamenco songs that adapt their lyrics to the Christmas theme. These cantes have been maintained to this day, the Zambomba Jerezana being spatially representative, declared an Asset of Intangible Cultural Interest by the Junta de Andalucía in December 2015. During the Spanish Civil War , a large number of singers were exiled or died defending the Republic and the humiliations to which they were being subjected by the National Party: Bando Nacional : Corruco de Algeciras , Chaconcito , El Carbonerillo , El Chato De Las Ventas , Vallejito , Rita la Cantaora , Angelillo , Guerrita are some of them. In the postwar period and the first years of the Franco regime , the world of flamenco was viewed with suspicion, as the authorities were not clear that this genre contributed to the national conscience. However, the regime soon ended up adopting flamenco as one of the quintessential Spanish cultural manifestations. The singers who have survived the war go from stars to almost outcasts, singing for the young men in the private rooms of the brothels in the center of Seville where they have to adapt to the whims of aristocrats, soldiers and businessmen who have become rich. In short, the period of the flamenco opera was a time open to creativity and that definitely made up most of the flamenco repertoire. It was the Golden Age of this genre, with figures such as Antonio Chacón , Manuel Vallejo Manuel Vallejo [ es ; fr ], Manuel Torre , La Niña de los Peines , Pepe Marchena and Manolo Caracol . Flamencología[ edit ] Starting in the 1950s, abundant anthropological and musicological studies on flamenco began to be published. In 1954 Hispavox published the first Antología del Cante Flamenco, a sound recording that was a great shock to its time, dominated by orchestrated cante and, consequently, mystified. In 1955, the Argentine intellectual Anselmo González Climent published an essay called "Flamencología", whose title he baptized the "set of knowledge, techniques, etc., on flamenco singing and dancing." This book dignified the study of flamenco by applying the academic methodology of musicology to it and served as the basis for subsequent studies on this genre. As a result, in 1956 the National Contest of Cante Jondo de Córdoba was organized and in 1958 the first flamencology chair was founded in Jerez de la Frontera, the oldest academic institution dedicated to the study, research, conservation, promotion and defense of the flamenco art. Likewise, in 1963 the Cordovan poet Ricardo Molina and the Sevillian cantaor Antonio Mairena published Alalimón Mundo y Formas del Cante flamenco , which has become a must-have reference work. For a long time the Mairenistas postulates were considered practically unquestionable, until they found an answer in other authors who elaborated the "Andalusian thesis", which defended that flamenco was a genuinely Andalusian product, since it had been developed entirely in this region and because its styles basic ones derived from the folklore of Andalusia. They also maintained that the Andalusian Gitanos had contributed decisively to their formation, highlighting the exceptional nature of flamenco among gypsy music and dances from other parts of Spain and Europe. The unification of the Gitanos and Andalusian thesis has ended up being the most accepted today. In short, between the 1950s and 1970s, flamenco went from being a mere show to also becoming an object of study. Flamenco protest during the Franco regime[ edit ] Flamenco became one of the symbols of Spanish national identity during the Franco regime , since the regime knew how to appropriate a folklore traditionally associated with Andalusia to promote national unity and attract tourism, constituting what was called national-flamenquismo. Hence, flamenco had long been seen as a reactionary or retrograde element. In the mid-60s and until the transition, cantaores who opposed the regime began to appear with the use of protest lyrics. These include: José Menese and lyricist Francisco Moreno Galván, Enrique Morente , Manuel Gerena, El Lebrijano , El Cabrero , Lole y Manuel , el Piki or Luis Marín, among many others. In contrast to this conservatism with which it was associated during the Franco regime, flamenco suffered the influence of the wave of activism that also shook the university against the repression of the regime when university students came into contact with this art in the recitals that were held, for example, at the Colegio Mayor de San Juan Evangelista: "flamenco amateurs and professionals got involved with performances of a manifestly political nature. It was a kind of flamenco protest charged with protest, which meant censorship and repression for the flamenco activists ". As the political transition progressed, the demands were deflated as flamenco inserted itself within the flows of globalized art. At the same time, this art was institutionalized until it reached the point that the Junta de Andalucía was attributed in 2007 "exclusive competence in matters of knowledge, conservation, research, training, promotion and dissemination". Flamenco fusion[ edit ] Finnish Flamenco dancer Reima Nikkinen with an unidentified woman dancer in December 1971 In the 1970s, there were airs of social and political change in Spain, and Spanish society was already quite influenced by various musical styles from the rest of Europe and the United States. There were also numerous singers who had grown up listening to Antonio Mairena , Pepe Marchena and Manolo Caracol . The combination of both factors led to a revolutionary period called flamenco fusion. [24] The singer Rocío Jurado internationalized flamenco at the beginning of the 70s, replacing the bata de cola with evening dresses. Her facet in the "Fandangos de Huelva" and in the Alegrías was recognized internationally for her perfect voice tessitura in these genres. She used to be accompanied in her concerts by guitarists Enrique de Melchor and Tomatito , not only at the national level but in countries like Colombia, Venezuela and Puerto Rico. The musical representative José Antonio Pulpón was a decisive character in that fusion, as he urged the cantaor Agujetas to collaborate with the Sevillian Andalusian rock group " Pata Negra ", the most revolutionary couple since Antonio Chacón and Ramón Montoya , initiating a new path for flamenco. It also fostered the artistic union between the virtuoso guitarist from Algeciras Paco de Lucía and the long-standing singer from the island Camarón de la Isla , who gave a creative impulse to flamenco that would mean its definitive break with Mairena's conservatism. When both artists undertook their solo careers, Camarón became a mythical cantaor for his art and personality, with a legion of followers, while Paco de Lucía reconfigured the entire musical world of flamenco, opening up to new influences, such as Brazilian music, Arabic and jazz and introducing new musical instruments such as the Peruvian cajon, the transverse flute, etc. Other leading performers in this process of formal flamenco renewal were Juan Peña El Lebrijano , who married flamenco with Andalusian music, and Enrique Morente , who throughout his long artistic career has oscillated between the purism of his first recordings and the crossbreeding with rock, or Remedios Amaya from Triana , cultivator of a unique style of tangos from Extremadura, and a wedge of purity in her cante make her part of this select group of established artists. Other singers with their own style include Cancanilla de Marbella . In 2011 this style became known in India thanks to María del Mar Fernández , who acts in the video clip of the film You Live Once, entitled Señorita. The film was seen by more than 73 million viewers. New flamenco[ edit ] In the 1980s a new generation of flamenco artists emerged who had been influenced by the mythical cantaor Camarón, Paco de Lucía, Morente, etc. These artists were interested in popular urban music, which in those years was renewing the Spanish music scene, it was the time of the Movida madrileña . Among them are " Pata Negra ", who fused flamenco with blues and rock, Ketama , of pop and Cuban inspiration and Ray Heredia, creator of his own musical universe where flamenco occupies a central place. Also the recording company Nuevos Medios released many musicians under the label nuevo flamenco and this denomination has grouped musicians very different from each other like Rosario Flores , daughter of Lola Flores , or the renowned singer Malú , niece of Paco de Lucía and daughter of Pepe de Lucía, who despite sympathizing with flamenco and keeping it in her discography has continued with her personal style. However, the fact that many of the interpreters of this new music are also renowned cantaores, in the case of José Mercé , El Cigala , and others, has led to labeling everything they perform as flamenco, although the genre of their songs differs quite a bit from the classic flamenco. This has generated very different feelings, both for and against. Other contemporary artists of that moment were O'Funkillo and Ojos de Brujo , Arcángel, Miguel Poveda , Mayte Martín , Marina Heredia, Estrella Morente or Manuel Lombo, etc. But the discussion between the difference of flamenco and new flamenco in Spain has just gained strength during since 2019 due to the success of new flamenco attracting the taste of the youngest Spanish fans but also in the international musical scene emphasizing the problem of how should we call this new musical genre mixed with flamenco. One of these artist who has reinvented flamenco is Rosalía , an indisputable name on the international music scene. "Pienso en tu mirá", "Di mi nombre" or the song that catapulted her to fame, "Malamente", are a combination of styles that includes a flamenco/south Spain traditional musical base. Rosalía has broken the limits of this musical genre by embracing other urban rhythms, but has also created a lot of controversy about which genre is she using. The Catalan artist has been awarded several Latin Grammy Awards and MTV Video Music Awards , which also, at just 30 years old, garners more than 40 million monthly listeners on Spotify . But it is not the only successful case, the Granada-born Dellafuente , C. Tangana , MAKA , RVFV, Demarco Flamenco, Maria Àrnal and Marcel Bagés, El Niño de Elche, Sílvia Pérez Cruz ; Califato 3/4, Juanito Makandé, Soledad Morente, María José Llergo o Fuel Fandango are only a few of the new spanish musical scene that includes flamenco in their music. It seems that the Spanish music scene is experiencing a change in its music and new rhythms are re-emerging together with new artists who are experimenting to cover a wider audience that wants to maintain the closeness that flamenco has transmitted for decades. Flamenco Culture Overseas[ edit ] The state of New Mexico, located in the southwest of the United States maintains a strong identity with Flamenco culture. The University of New Mexico located in Albuquerque offers a graduate degree program in Flamenco. Flamenco performances are widespread in the Albuquerque and Santa Fe communities, with the National institute of Flamenco sponsoring an annual festival, as well as a variety of professional flamenco performances offered at various locales. Emmy Grimm, known by her stage name La Emi is a professional Flamenco dancer and native to New Mexico who performs as well as teaches Flamenco in Santa Fe. She continues studying her art by traveling to Spain to work intensively with Carmela Greco and La Popi, as well as José Galván, Juana Amaya, Yolanda Heredia, Ivan Vargas Heredia, Torombo and Rocio Alcaide Ruiz. Main Palos[ edit ] The Palos of flamenco Palos (formerly known as cantes) are flamenco styles, classified by criteria such as rhythmic pattern, mode , chord progression , stanzaic form and geographic origin. There are over 50 different palos, some are sung unaccompanied while others have guitar or other accompaniment. Some forms are danced while others are not. Some are reserved for men and others for women while some may be performed by either, though these traditional distinctions are breaking down: the Farruca, for example, once a male dance, is now commonly performed by women too. There are many ways to categorize Palos but they traditionally fall into three classes: the most serious is known as cante jondo (or cante grande ), while lighter, frivolous forms are called Cante Chico . Forms that do not fit either category are classed as Cante Intermedio ( Pohren 2005 , 68). These are the best known palos ( Anon. 2019 ; Anon. 2012 ): Alegrías [ edit ] The alegrías are thought to derive from the Aragonese jota, which took root in Cadiz during the Peninsular war and the establishment of the Cortes de Cadiz. That is why its classic lyrics contain so many references to the Virgen del Pilar, the Ebro River and Navarra. Enrique Butrón is considered to have formalized the current flamenco style of alegrías and Ignacio Espeleta who introduced the characteristic "tiriti, tran, tran...". Some of the best known interpreters of alegrías are Enrique el Mellizo, Chato de la Isla, Pinini, Pericón de Cádiz, Aurelio Sellés, La Perla de Cádiz, Chano Lobato and El Folli. One of the structurally strictest forms of flamenco, a traditional dance in alegrías must contain each of the following sections: a salida (entrance), paseo (walkaround), silencio (similar to an adagio in ballet), castellana (upbeat section) zapateado (Literally "a tap of the foot") and bulerías . This structure though, is not followed when alegrías are sung as a standalone song (with no dancing). In that case, the stanzas are combined freely, sometimes together with other types of cantiñas . Alegrías has a rhythm consisting of 12 beats. It is similar to Soleares . Its beat emphasis is as follows: 1 2 [3] 4 5 [6] 7 [8] 9 [10] 11 [12]. Alegrías originated in Cádiz . Alegrías belongs to the group of palos called Cantiñas and it is usually played in a lively rhythm (120–170 beats per minute). The livelier speeds are chosen for dancing, while quieter rhythms are preferred for the song alone. Bulerías [ edit ] Bulerías a fast flamenco rhythm made up of a 12 beat cycle with emphasis in two general forms as follows: [12] 1 2 [3] 4 5 [6] 7 [8] 9 [10] 11 or [12] 1 2 [3] 4 5 6 [7] [8] 9 [10] 11. It originated among the Calé Romani people of Jerez during the 19th century, [25] originally as a fast, upbeat ending to soleares or alegrias . It is among the most popular and dramatic of the flamenco forms and often ends any flamenco gathering, often accompanied by vigorous dancing and tapping.
Toggle the table of contents Tap dance From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of dance involving percussive shoes Tap dancing class at Iowa State College , 1942 Tap dance (or tap) is a form of dance that uses the sounds of tap shoes striking the floor as a form of percussion ; it is often accompanied by music. [1] Tap dancing can also be a cappella , with no musical accompaniment; the sound of the taps is its own music. It is an African-American artform that evolved alongside the advent of jazz music . [2] [3] A type of step dance , tap began with the combination of Southern American and Irish dance traditions: British soft-shoe and hard-shoe step dances, and a variety of both slave and freeman step dances. The fusion of African rhythms and performance styles with European techniques of footwork led to the creation of tap dance. [4] This fusion began in the mid-17th century but did not become popular until the mid-19th century. [5] There are two major versions of tap dance: rhythm (jazz) tap and Broadway tap. Broadway tap focuses on dance; it is widely performed in musical theater . Rhythm tap focuses on musicality , and practitioners consider themselves to be a part of the jazz tradition. The sound is made by shoes that have a metal "tap" on the heel and toe. Different shoes may differ in their sound. Jimmy Slyde tap dancing Students performing a tap dance in Mexico City Tap dance is an indigenous American dance form with roots that go back 300 years to British and West African musical and step dance traditions. These fused and evolved into a form of dance called "jigging", which was taken up by minstrel show dancers in the 1800s. Tap dance then became a popular stage entertainment. [6] As minstrel shows began to decline in popularity, tap dance moved to the increasingly popular Vaudeville stage. Due to Vaudeville's unspoken "two-colored rule", which forbade blacks to perform solo, many Vaudeville tap acts were duets. [7] One such duo was "Buck and Bubbles," which consisted of John "Bubbles" Sublett tap dancing and Ford "Buck" Washington playing a piano. The duo performed a "Class Act", a routine in which the performers wore tuxedos, effectively distinguishing them from the older minstrel show concept of tap dancers as "grinning-and-dancing clowns." [8] Another notable figure during this period is Bill "Bojangles" Robinson , a protégé of Alice Whitman of The Whitman Sisters around 1904 (then known as "Willie Robinson"). [9] Well versed in both Buck and Wing dancing and Irish Step dancing, Robinson joined the Vaudeville circuit in 1902 in a duo with George W. Cooper. The act quickly became famous, headlining events across the country, and touring England as well. In 1908, the partnership ended and Robinson began dancing solo, which was extremely rare for a black man at that time. [10] Despite this, he had tremendous success and soon became a world-famous celebrity. [7] He went on to have a leading role in many films, notably in the Shirley Temple franchise. Shortly thereafter, the Nicholas Brothers came on the scene. Consisting of real life brothers Fayard and Harold, this team wowed audiences with their acrobatic feats incorporated into their classy style of dancing. A notable scene in the movie "Stormy Weather" features the pair dancing up a staircase and then descending the staircase in a series of leapfrogs over each other into a full split from which they rise with no hands. [11] During the 1930s, tap dance mixed with Lindy Hop . "Flying swing outs" and "flying circles" are Lindy Hop moves with tap footwork. In the mid-to-late 1950s, the style of entertainment changed. Jazz music and tap dance declined, while rock and roll and the new jazz dance emerged. What is now called jazz dance evolved out of tap dance, so both dances have many moves in common. But jazz evolved separately from tap dance to become a new form in its own right. Well known dancers during the 1960s and 1970s included Arthur Duncan and Tommy Tune .[ citation needed ] Segregation's impact[ edit ] A group of women are posed behind a male performer in blackface. During the 1930s and the 1940s, Americans were able to watch tap dancers perform on film. [13] However, Black tap dancers found it extremely difficult to be a part of these White films because segregation was extremely prominent in America. [13] This led to the creation of two different styles of tap dance: White tap dancers formed a Broadway style and Black dancers continued to evolve with the traditional rhythm based style. [13] Broadway tap dance was performed in mainly Broadway musicals and film, and it did not emphasize classic jazz rhythms. [13] Rhythm tap integrated more of the classic African roots of tap dance, and it emphasized jazz rhythms, musicality, and improvisation. [13] Musicality is the dancer's understanding of the music they are performing to. Improvisation is where a dancer makes up the movement as they perform, and the choreography is not prepared beforehand. There was also the "two-color rule," which made sure that black tap dancers were not able to perform solos onstage. [14] This led to some tap dancers performing comedic tap duets. There were stereotypes placed on black Americans such as the "Uncle Tom" stereotype, and many tap dancers were forced to wear " black-face " onstage in order to perform. [14] One of the first black tap dancers to be acknowledged by America was Bill "Bojangles" Robinson , who performed duets with Shirley Temple . [14] However, Bill Robinson's career was reduced to "minstrelsy," which can be defined as White performers using makeup to mock black culture or using black stereotypes in a performance. [15] Black Americans joined these minstrel performances, where they would be forced to act on black stereotypes in their performances. [15] James "Buster" Brown , got his start in the segregated clubs of the 1930s, but eventually earned international mainstream recognition and mentored younger more modern tap dancers in the 1990s. [16]
Toggle the table of contents Folk dance From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dance that reflects the life of the people of a certain region Traditional Valencian dances A folk dance is a dance that reflects the life of the people of a certain country or region. Not all ethnic dances are folk dances. For example, ritual dances or dances of ritual origin are not considered to be folk dances. Ritual dances are usually called "religious dances" because of their purpose. The terms "ethnic" and "traditional" are used when it is required to emphasize the cultural roots of the dance. In this sense, nearly all folk dances are ethnic ones. If some dances, such as polka , cross ethnic boundaries and even cross the boundary between "folk" and "ballroom dance", ethnic differences are often considerable enough to mention. [1] Traditional dancers and performance during the Pulljay festivities in Tarabuco Folk dances share some or all of the following attributes: Dances are usually held at folk dance gatherings or social functions by people with little or no professional training, often to traditional music. Dances not generally designed for public performance or the stage, though they may later be arranged and set for stage performances. Execution dominated by an inherited tradition from various international cultures rather than innovation (though folk traditions change over time). New dancers often learn informally by observing others or receiving help from others. More controversially, some people define folk dancing as dancing for which there is no governing body or dancing for which there are no competitive or professional institutions. The term "folk dance" is sometimes applied to dances of historical importance in European culture and history; typically originating before the 20th century. For other cultures the terms "ethnic dance" or "traditional dance" are sometimes used, although the latter terms may encompass ceremonial dances . There are a number of modern dances, such as hip hop dance, that evolve spontaneously, but the term "folk dance" is generally not applied to them, and the terms "street dance" or "vernacular dance" are used instead. The term "folk dance" is reserved for dances which are to a significant degree bound by tradition and originated in the times when the distinction existed between the dances of "common folk" and the dances of the modern ballroom dances originated from folk ones. Rapper Sword Dancers - Sheffield Steel Folk Dancing at Jack in the Green  May Day festival in Hastings, UK. Turkey folk dance Armenian dancers. HlushenkovFolkFest in Khmelnytskyi, Ukraine. Varieties of European folk dances include:
Toggle the table of contents Ballroom dance From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of partner dances WDC World Youth (Under 21) Champions 2013, Michael Foskett & Nika Vlasenko. Adjudicators in background are former World Champion & British Open to the World Champions: Anne (Lewis) Gleave (red dress) and Karen Hilton MBE (black dress). Ballroom dance is a set of European partner dances , which are enjoyed both socially and competitively around the world, mostly because of its performance and entertainment aspects.  Ballroom dancing is also widely enjoyed on stage, film, and television. Ballroom dance may refer, at its widest definition, to almost any recreational dance with a partner. However, with the emergence of dance competition (now known as Dancesport ), two principal schools have emerged and the term is used more narrowly to refer to the dances recognized by those schools. The International School, originally developed in England [1] and now regulated by the World Dance Council ( WDC ) and the World DanceSport Federation ( WDSF ), is most prevalent in Europe. It encompasses two categories, Standard and Latin , each of which consist of five dances—International Waltz, International Tango, International Viennese Waltz, International Slow Foxtrot, and International Quickstep in the Standard category and International Samba, International Cha Cha, International Rumba, International Paso Doble, and International Jive in the Latin category. A "Standard" or "Latin" competition encompasses all five dances in the respective category, and a "Ten Dance" competition encompasses all ten dances. The two styles, while differing in technique, rhythm, and costumes, exemplify core elements of ballroom dancing such as control and cohesiveness. The American School, also called North American School, is most prevalent in the United States and Canada, where it is regulated by USA Dance and Canada Dancesport ( CDS ) -- the respective national member bodies of the WDSF.  It also consists of two categories analogous to the Standard and Latin categories of the International School, respectively called Smooth and Rhythm.  The Smooth category consists of only four dances—American Waltz, American Tango, American Foxtrot, and American Viennese Waltz, omitting American Peabody (the American School equivalent to Quickstep) -- while the dances selected for competition in the Rhythm category are American Cha Cha, American Rumba, American East Coast Swing (the American School equivalent to International Jive), American Bolero, and American Mambo. [2] [3] A "Smooth" or "Rhythm" competition encompasses the dances in the respective category, and a "Nine Dance" competition encompassing all nine of these dances is analogous to the "Ten Dance" competition of the International School.  USA Dance additionally recognizes American Peabody, American Merengue, American Paso Doble, American Samba, American West Coast Swing, American Polka, and American Hustle as ballroom dances in which sanctioned competition may take place. Note that dances of the two schools that bear the same name may differ considerably in permitted patterns (figures), technique, and styling. Exhibitions and social situations that feature ballroom dancing also may include additional partner dances such as Lindy Hop, Night Club Two Step, Night Club Swing, Bachata, Country Two Step, and regional (local or national) favorites that normally are not regarded as part of the ballroom family, and a number of historical dances also may be danced in ballrooms or salons.  Additionally, some sources regard Sequence Dancing, in pairs or other formations, to be a style of ballroom dance. [4] Definitions and history[ edit ] Galliard in Siena , Italy, 15th century The term 'ballroom dancing' is derived from the word ball which in turn originates from the Latin word ballare which means 'to dance' (a ball-room being a large room specially designed for such dances). In times past, ballroom dancing was social dancing for the privileged, leaving folk dancing for the lower classes. These boundaries have since become blurred. The definition of ballroom dance also depends on the era: balls have featured popular dances of the day such as the Minuet , Quadrille , Polonaise , Polka , Mazurka , and others, which are now considered to be historical dances . Early modern period[ edit ] The first authoritative knowledge of the earliest ballroom dances was recorded toward the end of the 16th century, when Jehan Tabourot, under the pen name " Thoinot-Arbeau ", published in 1588 his Orchésographie, a study of late 16th-century French renaissance social dance. Among the dances described were the solemn basse danse , the livelier branle , pavane , and the galliarde which Shakespeare called the "cinq pace" as it was made of five steps. [5] In 1650, the Minuet , originally a peasant dance of Poitou , was introduced into Paris and set to music by Jean-Baptiste Lully and danced by the King Louis XIV in public. The Minuet dominated the ballroom from that time until the close of the 18th century. Toward the later half of the 17th century, Louis XIV founded his ' Académie Royale de Musique et de Danse ', where specific rules for the execution of every dance and the " five positions " of the feet were formulated for the first time by members of the Académie. Eventually, the first definite cleavage between ballet and ballroom came when professional dancers appeared in the ballets, and the ballets left the Court and went to the stage. Ballet technique such as the turned out positions of the feet, however, lingered for over two centuries and past the end of the Victoria era. [5] 19th century[ edit ] The waltz with its modern hold took root in England in about 1812; in 1819 Carl Maria von Weber wrote Invitation to the Dance , which marked the adoption of the waltz form into the sphere of absolute music. The dance was initially met with tremendous opposition due to the semblance of impropriety associated with the closed hold, though the stance gradually softened. [5] In the 1840s several new dances made their appearance in the ballroom, including the polka , mazurka , and the Schottische . In the meantime a strong tendency emerged to drop all 'decorative' steps such as entrechats and ronds de jambes that had found a place in the Quadrilles and other dances. Early 20th century[ edit ] Vernon and Irene Castle , early ballroom dance pioneers, c. 1910–18 Modern ballroom dance has its roots early in the 20th century, when several different things happened more or less at the same time. The first was a movement away from the sequence dances towards dances where the couples moved independently. This had been pre-figured by the waltz, which had already made this transition. The second was a wave of popular music, such as jazz . Since dance is to a large extent tied to music, this led to a burst of newly invented dances. There were many dance crazes in the period 1910–1930. The third event was a concerted effort to transform some of the dance crazes into dances which could be taught to a wider dance public in the U.S. and Europe. Here Vernon and Irene Castle were important, and so was a generation of English dancers in the 1920s, including Josephine Bradley and Victor Silvester . These professionals analysed, codified, published, and taught a number of standard dances. It was essential, if popular dance was to flourish, for dancers to have some basic movements they could confidently perform with any partner they might meet. Here the huge Arthur Murray organisation in America, and the dance societies in England, such as the Imperial Society of Teachers of Dancing , were highly influential. Finally, much of this happened during and after a period of World War, and the effect of such a conflict in dissolving older social customs was considerable. [1] [6] Later, in the 1930s, the on-screen dance pairing of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers influenced all forms of dance in the U.S. and elsewhere. Although both actors had separate careers, their filmed dance sequences together, which included portrayals of the Castles, have reached iconic status. [7] Much of Astaire and Rogers' work portrayed social dancing, although the performances were highly choreographed (often by Astaire or Hermes Pan ) and meticulously staged and rehearsed. [8] Main article: Dancesport Cha-cha-cha dance at competitions in Austria. Competitions, sometimes referred to as dancesport , range from world championships, regulated by the World Dance Council (WDC), to less advanced dancers at various proficiency levels. Most competitions are divided into professional and amateur, though in the USA pro-am competitions typically accompany professional competitions. [9] The International Olympic Committee now recognizes competitive ballroom dance. [10] It has recognized another body, the World DanceSport Federation (WDSF), as the sole representative body for dancesport in the Olympic Games . Ballroom dance competitions are regulated by each country in its own way. There are about 30 countries which compete regularly in international competitions. There are another 20 or so countries which have membership of the WDC and/or the WDSF, but whose dancers rarely appear in international competitions. [11] In Britain there is the British Dance Council , which grants national and regional championship titles, such as the British Ballroom Championships, the British Sequence Championships and the United Kingdom Championships. In the United States, the member branches of the WDC (National Dance Council of America) and the WDSF ( USA Dance ) both grant national and regional championship titles. [12] [13] Ballroom dancing competitions in the former USSR also included the Soviet Ballroom dances , or Soviet Programme. Australian New Vogue is danced both competitively and socially. In competition, there are 15 recognized New Vogue dances, which are performed by the competitors in sequence. These dance forms are not recognized internationally, neither are the US variations such as American Smooth, and Rhythm. Such variations in dance and competition methods are attempts to meets perceived needs in the local market-place. Internationally, the Blackpool Dance Festival , hosted annually at Blackpool , England is considered the most prestigious event a dancesport competitor can attend. Formation dance is another style of competitive dance recognized by the WDSF. In this style, multiple dancers (usually in couples and typically up to 16 dancers at one time) compete on the same team, moving in and out of various formations while dancing. The Blackpool Dance Festival also holds an annual event for competitive formation dancing. Elements of competition[ edit ] Intermediate level international style Latin dancing at the 2006 MIT ballroom dance competition. A judge stands in the foreground. In competitive ballroom, dancers are judged by diverse criteria such as poise, the hold or frame, posture, musicality and expression, timing, body alignment and shape, floor craft, foot and leg action, and presentation. Judging in a performance-oriented sport is inevitably subjective in nature, and controversy and complaints by competitors over judging placements are not uncommon. The scorekeepers—called scrutineers—will tally the total number recalls accumulated by each couple through each round until the finals when the Skating system is used to place each couple by ordinals, typically 1–6, though the number of couples in the final may vary. Sometimes, up to 8 couples may be present on the floor during the finals. Competitors dance at different levels based on their ability and experience. The levels are split into two categories, syllabus and open. The syllabus levels are newcomer/pre-bronze, bronze, silver, and gold—with gold the highest syllabus level and newcomer the lowest. In these levels, moves are restricted to those written in a syllabus, and illegal moves can lead to disqualification. Each level, bronze, silver, and gold, has different moves on their syllabus, increasing in difficulty. There are three levels in the open category; novice, pre-champ, and champ in increasing order of skill. At those levels, dancers no longer have restrictions on their moves, so complex routines are more common. Medal evaluations[ edit ] Medal evaluations for amateurs enable dancers' individual abilities to be recognized according to conventional standards. In medal evaluations, which are run by bodies such as the Imperial Society of Teachers of Dancing (ISTD) and the United Kingdom Alliance (UKA) , each dancer performs two or more dances in a certain genre in front of a judge. Genres such as Modern Ballroom or Latin are the most popular. Societies such as the ISTD and UKA also offer medal tests on other dance styles (such as Country & Western, Rock 'n Roll or Tap). In some North American examinations, levels include Newcomer, Bronze, Silver, Gold, Novice, Pre-championship, and Championship; each level may be further subdivided into either two or four separate sections. Collegiate ballroom[ edit ] People on the dance floor waiting to dance and compete. There is a part of the ballroom world dedicated to college students. These chapters are typically clubs or teams that have an interest in ballroom dancing. Teams hold fundraisers, social events, and ballroom dance lessons. Ballroom dance teams' goals are to have fun and learn to dance well. There is a strong focus on finding a compatible dance partner and bonding with teammates. There is also a competitive side to collegiate ballroom - collegiate teams often hold competitions and invite other teams to participate. [14] These competitions are often run with many of the same rules are regular amateur competitions as outlined above, but are usually organized entirely by collegiate teams. Examples include the MIT Open Ballroom Dance Competition, Big Apple Dancesport Challenge, Purdue Ballroom Classic, Cardinal Classic, Berkeley Classic, and Harvard Invitational. Dances[ edit ] "Ballroom dance" refers most often to the ten dances of Standard and Latin, though the term is also often used interchangeably with the five International Ballroom dances. [15] Sequence dancing , which is danced predominantly in the United Kingdom, and its development New Vogue in Australia and New Zealand, are also sometimes included as a type of Ballroom dancing. In the United States and Canada, the American Style (American Smooth and American Rhythm) also exists. The dance technique used for both International and American styles is similar, but International Ballroom allows only closed dance positions , whereas American Smooth allows closed, open and separated dance movements. In addition, different sets of dance figures are usually taught for the two styles. International Latin and American Rhythm have different styling, and have different dance figures in their respective syllabi. Other dances sometimes placed under the umbrella "ballroom dance" include nightclub dances such as Lindy Hop , West Coast swing , nightclub two step , hustle , salsa , and merengue . The categorization of dances as "ballroom dances" has always been fluid, with new dances or folk dances being added to or removed from the ballroom repertoire from time to time, so no list of subcategories or dances is any more than a description of current practices. There are other dances historically accepted as ballroom dances, and are revived via the vintage dance movement. In Europe, Latin Swing dances include Argentine tango , mambo , Lindy Hop , swing boogie (sometimes also known as nostalgic boogie), and discofox . One example of this is the subcategory of cajun dances that originated in Acadiana , with branches reaching both coasts of the United States. Standard/Smooth dances are normally danced to Western music (often from the mid-twentieth century), and couples dance counter-clockwise around a rectangular floor following the line of dance . In competitions, competitors are costumed as would be appropriate for a white tie affair, with full gowns for the ladies and bow tie and tail coats for the men; though in American Smooth it is now conventional for the men to abandon the tailsuit in favor of shorter tuxedos , vests, and other creative outfits. Latin/Rhythm dances are commonly danced to contemporary Latin American music and (in case of jive) Western music. With the exception of a few traveling dances like samba and pasodoble , couples do not follow the line of dance but perform their routines more or less in one spot. In competitions, the women are often dressed in short-skirted Latin outfits while the men are outfitted in tight-fitting shirts and pants, the goal being to emphasize the dancers' leg action and body movements. Competitive dances[ edit ] Victor Fung and Anna Mikhed dancing a tango in 2006. The couple, dancing for the US, came third in the Professional World Championship 2009.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hawaiian traditional dance form This article is about the Hawaiian dance. For other uses, see Hula (disambiguation) . Hula kahiko performance in Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park Hula in Hawaii. Kumu hula Frank Kawaikapuokalani Hewett performs during a ceremony transferring control over the island of Kahoʻolawe from the U.S. Navy to the state. Hula ( /ˈhuːlə/ ) is a Hawaiian dance form expressing chant (oli) [1] or song ( mele ). It was developed in the Hawaiian Islands by the Native Hawaiians who settled there. The hula dramatizes or portrays the words of the oli or mele in a visual dance form. There are many sub-styles of hula, with the two main categories being Hula ʻAuana and Hula Kahiko. [2] Ancient hula, performed before Western encounters with Hawaiʻi, is called kahiko. It is accompanied by chant and traditional instruments. Hula, as it evolved under Western influence in the 19th and 20th centuries, is called ʻauana (a word that means "to wander" or "drift"). It is accompanied by song and Western-influenced musical instruments such as the guitar , the ʻukulele , and the double bass . Terminology for two additional categories is beginning to enter the hula lexicon: "Monarchy" includes any hula which were composed and choreographed during the 19th century. During that time the influx of Western culture created significant changes in the formal Hawaiian arts, including hula. "Ai Kahiko", meaning "in the ancient style" are those hula written in the 20th and 21st centuries that follow the stylistic protocols of the ancient hula kahiko. There are also two main positions of a hula dance: either sitting (noho dance) or standing (luna dance). Some dances utilize both forms. In the 1890s and early 1900s, hula dancers and Hawaiian musicians toured the U.S. mainland. This advertisement appeared in an Ohio newspaper in 1921. Hula dancing is complex, with many hand motions used to represent the words in a song or chant. For example, hand movements can signify aspects of nature, such as the swaying of a tree in the breeze or a wave in the ocean, or a feeling or emotion, such as fondness or yearning.  Foot and hip movements often pull from a basic library of steps including the kāholo, kaʻo, kāwelu, hela, ʻuwehe, and ʻami. There are other related dances ( tamure , hura, 'aparima , 'ote'a , haka , kapa haka , poi , Fa'ataupati , Tau'olunga , and Lakalaka ) that come from other Polynesian islands such as Tahiti , The Cook Islands , Samoa , Tonga and New Zealand ; however, the hula is unique to the Hawaiian Islands. [3] Five hula genres can be placed across a spectrum with "the most ancient" on the left and "the most modern" on the right side. The Hula pahu and hula 'āla'apapa subcategories are ancient, originating before the introduction of Christianity. Thanks to well-preserved documentation, guidelines for performers to bring the poetic text back on stage remain clear in manuscript sources. On the other side of the continuum, hapa haole songs are relatively modern and they were also disseminated as notated sheet music, the joint effort of contemporary ethnomusicologists and songwriters. The other the two hula types, hula ku'i and hula 'ōlapa are a challenge to editors in terms of textualizing and representing them within a critical edition. These two genres reflect the social transformation and westernization within the region, influenced by American economics and politics. More importantly, the same strophic text format is applied in both genres, constructed with two or four lines of text, with each of them commonly set to a uniform number of beats. During performance, it is a usual practice that the songs are separated into stanzas which are repeated by a brief rhythmic interlude. Among the genres of hula, the corresponding melodic structure and the strophic musical structure make modern hula ku'i and hula 'ōlapa distinguishable from the others. [4] Hula kahiko performance at the pa hula in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park Hula kahiko, often defined as those hula composed prior to 1894 which do not include modern instrumentation (such as guitar, ʻukulele, etc.), encompasses an enormous variety of styles and moods, from the solemn and sacred to the frivolous. Many hula were created to praise the chiefs and performed in their honor, or for their entertainment. Types of hula kahiko include ʻālaʻapapa, haʻa, ʻōlapa, and many others.  Today hula kahiko is simply stated as "Traditional" Hula. Many hula dances are considered to be a religious performance, as they are dedicated to, or honoring, a Hawaiian goddess or god. As was true of ceremonies at the heiau , the platform temple, even a minor error was considered to invalidate the performance. It might even be a presage of bad luck or have dire consequences. Dancers who were learning to do such hula necessarily made many mistakes. Hence they were ritually secluded and put under the protection of the goddess Laka during the learning period. Ceremonies marked the successful learning of the hula and the emergence from seclusion. Hula kahiko is performed today by dancing to the historical chants.  Many hula kahiko are characterized by traditional costuming, by an austere look, and a reverence for their spiritual root. Chant (Oli)[ edit ] Hawaiian history was oral history . It was codified in genealogies and chants, which were memorized and passed down. In the absence of a written language , this was the only available method of ensuring accuracy.  Chants told the stories of creation, mythology, royalty, and other significant events and people. The ʻŌlelo Noʻeau (Hawaiian saying or proverb), "'O 'oe ka luaʻahi o kāu mele," translates loosely as "You bear both the good and the bad consequences of the poetry you compose" [5] The idea behind this saying originates from the ancient Hawaiian belief that language possessed mana, or "power derived from a spiritual source" [5] particularly when delivered through oli (chant). Therefore, skillful manipulation of language by haku mele (composers) and chanters was of utmost reverence and importance. Oli was an integral component of ancient Hawaiian society, and arose in nearly every social, political and economic aspect of life. Traditional chant types are extremely varied in context and technical components, and cover a broad range of specific functions. Among them (in vague descending order of sacredness) exist mele pule (prayer), hula kuahu (ritual dance), kūʻauhau (cosmogeny), koʻihonua (genealogy), hānau (birth), inoa (name), maʻi (procreation/genital), kanikau (lamentation), hei (game), hoʻoipoipo (love), and kāhea (expression/call out). [6] An important distinction between oli, hula, and mele is as follows: mele can hold many different meanings, and is often translated to mean simply, song. However, in a more broad sense, mele can be taken to mean poetry or linguistic composition. Hula (chant with dance) and oli (chant without dance) are two general styles in which mele can be used/performed. Generally, "all mele may be performed as oli (chant without dance), but only certain types such as name chants, sex chants, love chants, and chants dedicated to the ['aumakua] gods of hula (ritual dance), may be performed as hula (chant with dance)." [6] Hawaiian language contains 43 different words to describe voice quality; the technique and particularity of chanting styles is crucial to understanding their function. The combination of general style (with or without dance) and the context of the performance determines what vocal style a chant will use. Kepakepa, kāwele, olioli, ho'āeae, ho'ouēuē, and 'aiha'a are examples of styles differentiated by vocal technique. Kepakepa sounds like rapid speech and is often spoken in long phrases. Olioli is a style many would liken to song, as it is melodic in nature and includes sustained pitches, [6] often with 'i'i, or vibrato of the voice that holds vowel tones at the ends of lines. A law passed in Hawai'i in 1896 (shortly after American overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom ) banned the use of 'Ōlelo Hawai'i in schools. This, in combination with a general usurpation of Hawaiian social, political, and linguistic autonomy resulted in a mass decline of the Hawaiian language, to the near brink of extinction. As a result of Americanization, including the spread of Christianity, many traditional chants became viewed as pagan and were ultimately forgotten. But a cultural resurgence beginning in the late 1960s, and carrying through to today has revitalized many Hawaiian practices, including spoken language and chant, and has been furthered by increasing support from various institutions, including Pūnana Leo Hawaiian language immersion schools, funded by the Hawai'i State Department of Education as well as major hula competitions such as the Merrie Monarch Festival, which officially began in 1971. [5] In hālau hula (hula schools) asking permission to enter the space in order to partake in the knowledge of the kumu (teacher) is a key component to being a student. Many hālau use a variation of "Kūnihi," [5] an oli kāhea, most typically done in an olioli style. Students often stand outside the entrance and chant repeatedly until the kumu decides to grant them permission to enter, and uses a different chant in response. This is an example of how oli is integrated into modern day cultural practices, within the context of hula training. Oli is universally considered as the most typical type of indigenous music that is not constructed onto meters. In fact, the artistic expression of oli varies according to the circumstances where the performance is conducted, which is also the reason why there are five different articulatory vocal techniques were developed in oli repertoire. These five styles are: kepakepa: A conversational patter that is expected to be performed swiftly, where the syllables are usually too short to allow pitches to be identified. kawele: Comparing with the kepakepa, syllables are sustained a bit longer in kawele, but yet to be easily identified in pitches. It tends to be a more suitable form for recitation and declamation among Olis. olioli: It is regarded as the most commonly used kind of oli, which the sustained pitch monotone carries the poetic form in a more vocally-embellished way. ho'āeae: It uses sustained pitches more often and there can be multiple pitches following fundamental configuration throughout the musical context. ho'ouweuwe: it is exclusively applied as the laments in funeral. Oli performer does not purposely learn repertoire with the aim of merely learning the melodies, but the performative techniques. The most important thing for performer to master is decide which style the poetic text can be perfectly fitted into and figure out the way that can flawlessly combine both the text and the oli style according to the given context, such time limits and the particular situation where the oli is delivered. [4] Instruments and implements[ edit ]
Toggle the table of contents Breakdancing From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Style of street dance "Breakdance" redirects here. For other uses, see Breakdance (disambiguation) . "B-girl" redirects here. For other uses, see B-girl (disambiguation) . "B boy" redirects here. For other uses, see B Boy (disambiguation) . Breaking/Bboying A breakdancer performing outside Faneuil Hall , Boston, United States Genre Breaking in the street, 2013 A breakdancer standing on his head in Cologne, Germany, 2017 Breaking, also called b-boying, b-girling or breakdancing, is a style of street dance developed by African American and Puerto Rican communities in The Bronx , New York City , United States. Breakdancing consists mainly of four kinds of movement— toprock , downrock , power moves , and freezes —and is typically set to songs containing drum breaks , especially in funk , soul , and hip-hop . Its modern dance elements originated among the poor youth of New York during the early 1970s. [1] It is tied to the birth of hip-hop, whose DJs developed rhythmic breaks for dancers. [2] The dance form has expanded globally, with an array of organizations and independent competitions supporting its growth. Breaking will become an Olympic sport at the 2024 Paris Summer Olympics , [3] per a December 7, 2020, decision by the International Olympic Committee after a proposal by the World DanceSport Federation . [4] Terminology[ edit ] The origin of the term "breakdance" is unknown. It was used by hiphop pioneer Kurtis Blow in a 1980 profile by Bill Adler in the New York Daily News . [5] The term is frequently used to refer to the dance in popular culture and in the mainstream entertainment industry. The term "breakdancing" has become an umbrella term that includes California-based dance styles such as popping , locking , and electric boogaloo , in addition to the New York-based b-boying. [6] : 60 [7] [8] [9] A practitioner of this dance is called a b-boy, b-girl, breakdancer, or breaker. The terms "b-boy" ("break-boy"), "b-girl" ("break-girl"), and "breaker" were the original terms used to describe the dancers who performed to DJ Kool Herc 's breakbeats. The obvious connection of the term "breaking" is to the word " breakbeat ".[ citation needed ] DJ Kool Herc has said that the term "breaking" was 1970s slang for "getting excited", "acting energetically" or "causing a disturbance". [10] Most pioneers and notable practitioners prefer the older terms "b-boying" and "breaking". [11] [12] Frosty Freeze of the Rock Steady Crew has said, "We were known as b-boys"; hip-hop pioneer Afrika Bambaataa has said, "B-boys, [are] what you call break boys...or b-girls, what you call break girls." [11] Co-founder of Rock Steady Crew Santiago "Jo Jo" Torres, Rock Steady Crew member Marc "Mr. Freeze" Lemberger, hip-hop historian Fab 5 Freddy , and rappers Big Daddy Kane [13] and Tech N9ne [14] use the term "b-boy". [11] Some enthusiasts consider "breakdancing" an ignorant, and even pejorative, term. [15] Others use it to derogatorily refer to studio -trained dancers who can perform the moves but who do not live a "b-boy lifestyle". [6] : 61 Still others use the term "breakdancer" to disparage those who learn the dance for personal gain rather than for commitment to the culture. [6] : 61 Many accuse the media of presenting a simplified [16] version of the dance that focuses on "tricks" instead of culture. [17] Source Kurtis Blow But it was in his secret identity as a B-boy (B for Beat) during after-school hours that Kurtis really shined. "I was the best dancer at the school " he claimed. "When I was 15 I used to go down to Nell Gwinn's[sic] and do that frantic Breakdance- the fancy, fancy footwork to the funky, funky music- and I would have the crowd in the palm of my hand." Michael Holman , New York City Breakers "Maybe what Legs is doing is saying "I want to reeducate the marketplace and make them see that everything that came before was 'breakdancing' and what's going on now is 'b-boying.' And it's all under my control and auspices and whim and whatever." And so it's a cleansing; it's like an etymological purging....But it's smart, because it's a paradigm shift in which he now is not just a player but is a kingmaker. A kingpin." Mandalit del Barco , journalist "Breakdancing may have died, but the b-boy, one of four original elements of hip hop (also included: the MC, the DJ, and the graffiti artist) lives on. To those who knew it before it was tagged with the name breakdancing, to those still involved in the scene that they will always know as b-boying, the tradition is alive and, well, spinning." [18] Foundation , by Joseph Schloss "In addition to its general association with commercialism, the term breakdancing is also problematic on a more practical level. Unlike b-boying, which refers to a specific dance form that developed in New York City in the '70s, breakdancing is often used as an umbrella term that includes not only b-boying, but also popping, locking, boogalooing, and other so-called funk-style dances that originated in California." The Electric Boogaloos "In the 80's when streetdancing [sic] blew up, the media often incorrectly used the term 'breakdancing' as an umbrella term for most the streetdancing [sic] styles that they saw. What many people didn't know was [that] within these styles, other sub-cultures existed, each with their own identities. Breakdancing, or b-boying as it is more appropriately known as, is known to have its roots in the east coast and was heavily influenced by break beats and hip hop." Timothy "Popin' Pete" Solomon ; Electric Boogaloos "An important thing to clarify is that the term 'Break dancing' is wrong, I read that in many magazines but that is a media term. The correct term is 'Breakin', people who do it are B-Boys and B-Girls. The term 'Break dancing' has to be thrown out of the dance vocabulary." [20] Hip-Hop Dance Conservatory "Breaking or b-boying is generally misconstrued or incorrectly termed as 'breakdancing'. Breakdancing is a term spawned from the loins of the media's philistinism , sciolism , and naïveté at that time. With no true knowledge of the hip-hop diaspora but with an ineradicable need to define it for the nescient masses, the term breakdancing was born. Most breakers take great offense to the term." Jeff Chang "During the 1970s, an array of dances practiced by black and Latino kids sprang up in the inner cities of New York and California. The styles had a dizzying list of names: 'uprock' in Brooklyn, 'locking' in Los Angeles, 'boogaloo' and 'popping' in Fresno, and 'strutting' in San Francisco and Oakland. When these dances gained notice in the mid-'80s outside of their geographic contexts, the diverse styles were lumped together under the tag 'break dancing'. American Heritage Dictionary "b-boy (bē′boi′) n. A man or boy who engages in b-boying. [b-, probably short for BREAK (from the danceable breaks in funk recordings from which turntablists make breakbeat music to which b-boying is done ) + BOY.]" "break dancing also break·danc·ing (brāk dăn′sĭng) n. A form of nonrhythmic urban dance characterized by acrobatic and gymnastic movements." "break·ing (brā kĭng) n. A form of urban dance involving styles such as locking, popping, and b-boying, usually performed to funk music. Also called break dancing." "Salmon polka" in The Rob Roy on the Baltic. A breaker practicing downrock at a studio in Moscow Many elements of breaking developed before the 1970s. Even Colonial American dances such as the minuet , Juba , the quadrille , and the waltz have may have contributed elements. The Juba, for example, is an African dance where men had dance circles where one man at a time would go and dance, similar to modern-day breaking. This dance also inspired competition, also seen in breakdancing, because better treatment would be given to the slave who intrigued their master. [25] In the 1877 book Rob Roy on the Baltic, [26] John MacGregor describes seeing near Norrköping a "young man quite alone, who was practicing over and over the most inexplicable leap in the air...he swung himself up, and then round on his hand for a point, when his upper leg described a great circle." The engraving shows a young man apparently breakdancing. The dance was called the Giesse Harad Polska or "salmon district dance". In 1894, Thomas Edison filmed Walter Wilkins, Denny Toliver, and Joe Rastus dancing and performing a "breakdown". [27] [28] Then in 1898 he filmed a young street dancer performing acrobatic headspins. [29] Some authors claim that breakdancing and capoeira have common African origin, while others claim that capoeira directly influenced breaking. [30] There is also evidence of a similar style of dancing in Kaduna, Nigeria, in 1959. [31] B-boy pioneers Richard "Crazy Legs" Colon and Kenneth "Ken Swift" Gabbert, both of Rock Steady Crew, cite James Brown and Kung Fu films (notably Bruce Lee films) as influences. Many of the acrobatic moves, such as the flare , show clear connections to gymnastics. However, it was not until the 1970s that breakdancing developed as a defined dance style in the United States. These precursing elements began to take form in the early 1970s, as breaking began to grow at parties featuring DJs and instrumental records. [32] It was at these parties that DJ Kool Herc , a Bronx based DJ pioneer, developed rhythmic breakdown sections by simultaneously switching between two copies of the same record, creating “ breaks ”. [33] By looping the records and their simultaneous breaks, he was able to prolong the break and provide a rhythmic and improvisational base for dancers: [34] Herc tells Jeff Chang in his book Can't Stop Won't Stop (2005) , “And once they heard that, that was it, wasn't no turning back. They always wanted to hear breaks after breaks after breaks after breaks." [35] Breaking prompted dance battles and dance sessions known as "cyphers", competitive circles in which participants took turns dancing while surrounded by onlookers. The Five-Percent Nation first used the term “cypher” to denote circles of people. [36] Crews including the Rock Steady Crew or Mighty Zulu Kingz began to form, in response to the growth of competitive cyphers which sometimes featured cash-prizes, titles, and bragging rights. [36] Uprock[ edit ] Breaking started as toprock , footwork-oriented dance moves performed standing up, but as dance crews began to experiment, a separate dance form known as uprock further influenced breaking. [37] Uprock , also known as Brooklyn uprock, is a more aggressive dance style commonly performed between two partners that feature intricate footwork and hitting motions, mimicking a fight. [35] As a separate dance style, it never gained the same widespread popularity as breakdancing, except for some very specific moves adopted by breakers who use it as a variation for their toprock. [35] Uprock is also stated to have roots in gangs, as an expressive medium used to settle turf disputes, with the winner deciding the location of a future battle. [37] Although some disagree that breakdancing ever played a part in mediating gang rivalry, the early growth of breaking still primarily served to assist the poor youth of the Bronx to stray away from gang violence and rather expel their time towards an artistic dance. [1] One example is former gang leader Afrika Bambaataa , who hosted hip-hop parties and vowed to specifically use hip-hop to support children away from gang violence. He would eventually form the Universal Zulu Nation to further his message. [1] Some breakers argue that because uprock was originally a separate dance style it should never be mixed with breakdancing and that the uprock moves performed by breakers today are not the original moves but imitations that only show a small part of the original uprock style. [38] In the music video for 1985's hit single " I Wonder If I Take You Home ", Lisa Lisa and Cult Jam 's drummer Mike Hughes can be seen "rocking" (doing uprock) at 1:24 when viewed on YouTube . Brazil[ edit ] Ismael Toledo was one of the first breakers in Brazil. [39] In 1984, he moved to the United States to study dance. [39] While in the U.S. he discovered breakdancing and ended up meeting breaker Crazy Legs who personally mentored him for the four years that followed. [39] After becoming proficient in breakdancing, he moved back to São Paulo and started to organize crews and enter international competitions. [39] He eventually opened a hip-hop dance studio called the Hip-Hop Street College. [39] Cambodia[ edit ] Born in Thailand and raised in the United States, Tuy "KK" Sobil started a community center called Tiny Toones in Phnom Penh , Cambodia in 2005 where he uses dancing, hip-hop music, and art to teach Cambodian youth language skills, computer skills, and life skills (hygiene, sex education, counseling). His organization helps roughly 5,000 youths each year. One of these youths include Diamond, who is regarded as Cambodia's first b-girl. [40] [41] Ottawa Youth breakdancing during Canada 150 Celebrations There are several ways breakdancing came to Canada. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, films such as Breakin' (1984) , Beat Street (1984), and the immigration of people from Chicago , New York , Detroit , Seattle , and Los Angeles introduced dance styles from the United States. Breakdancing expanded in Canada from there, with crews like Canadian Floormasters taking over the 80's scene, and New Energy opening for James Brown in 1984 at the Paladium in Montreal. Leading into the 90's, crews like Bag of Trix, Rakunz, Intrikit, Contents Under Pressure, Supernaturalz, Boogie Brats, and Red Power Squad, led the scene throughout the rest of the past two decades and counting. France[ edit ] Breakdancing took off in France in the early 1980s with the creation of groups such as the Paris City Breakers (who styled themselves after the well-known New York City Breakers ). In 1984, France became the first country in the world to have a regularly and nationally broadcast television show about Hip Hop—hosted by Sidney Duteil —with a focus on Hip Hop dance. [42] This show led to the explosion of Hip Hop dance in France, with many new crews appearing on the scene. [43] Japan[ edit ] Breakdancing in Japan was introduced in 1983 following the release of the movie Wild Style . The release of the movie was accompanied by a tour by the Rock Steady Crew and many Japanese were captivated. Other movies such as Flashdance followed and furthered the breakdance craze. Crazy-A, the leader of the Tokyo chapter of the Rock Steady Crew, [44] was dragged to see Flashdance by his then girlfriend and walked out captivated by the dance form and became one its earliest and one of the most influential breakers in Japanese history. Groups began to spring up as well, with early groups such as Tokyo B-Boys, Dynamic Rock Force (American kids from Yokota AB), B-5 Crew, and Mystic Movers popping up in Harajuku . The breakdancing community in Japan found a home in Tokyo's Yoyogi Park [44] in Harajuku, which still remains an active area for breakdancers and hip-hop enthusiasts. As hip-hop continued to grow in Japan, so did breakdancing and the breakdancing communities. Following the introduction of international breakdancing competitions, Japan began to compete and were praised for their agility and precision, yet they were criticized in the beginning for lacking originality. The Japanese began to truly flourish on the international stage following the breakdancing career of Taisuke Nonaka, known simply as Taisuke. Taisuke began to dominate the international scene and led the Japanese team Floorriorz to win the BOTY in 2015 against crew Kienjuice from Belarus. Despite Taisuke's successful career in group competitions, he failed to win the solo Red Bull BC One competition, an individual breakdancing championship that had continued to evade Japanese bboys. The first Japanese to win the BC One competition became Bboy Issei in 2016. Issei is widely regarded by many as the best Japanese breakdancer currently and in the eyes of some, the best worldwide. Female bboys, or "bgirls", are also prevalent in Japan and following the introduction of a female BC One competition in 2018, Japanese bgirl Ami Yuasa became the first female champion. Notable Japanese bboy crews include FoundNation, Body Carnival, and the Floorriorz. Notable Japanese bgirl crews include Queen of Queens, Body Carnival, and Nishikasai. South Korea[ edit ] Breakdancing was first introduced to South Korea by American soldiers shortly after its surge of popularity in the U.S. during the 1980s, but it was not until the late 1990s that the culture and dance took hold. [45] 1997 is known as the "Year Zero of Korean breaking". [9] A Korean-American hip hop promoter named John Jay Chon was visiting his family in Seoul and while he was there, he met a crew named Expression Crew in a club. He gave them a VHS tape of a Los Angeles breakdancing competition called Radiotron. [46] A year later when he returned, Chon found that his video and others like his had been copied and dubbed numerous times, and were feeding an ever-growing breaker community. In 2002, Korea's Expression Crew won the prestigious international breakdancing competition Battle of the Year , exposing the skill of the country's breakers to the rest of the world. Since then, the Korean government has capitalized on the popularity of the dance and has promoted it alongside Korean culture. R-16 Korea is the most well-known government-sponsored breakdancing event, and is hosted by the Korea Tourism Organization and supported by the Ministry of Culture, Sports, and Tourism. Famous breakdancing crews from Korea include Morning of Owl, Jinjo Crew , Rivers Crew and Gamblerz . Soviet Union[ edit ] In the 1980s the Soviet Union was in a state of the Cold War with the countries of the Western Bloc . Soviet people lived behind the Iron Curtain , so they usually learned the new fashion trends emerging in the capitalist countries with some delay. The Soviet Union first learned of breakdancing in 1984, when videotapes of the films Breakin', Breakin' 2 and Beat Street got into the country. In the USSR these movies were not released officially. They were brought home by Soviet citizens who had the opportunity to travel to Western countries (for example, by diplomats). Originally, the dance became popular in big cities: Moscow and Leningrad , as well as in the Baltic republics (some citizens of these Soviet republics had the opportunity to watch Western television). The attitude of the authorities to the new dance that came from the West was negative. [47] Breakdancing performance in Riga , Latvian SSR , 1986 The situation changed in 1985 with Mikhail Gorbachev who came to power and with the beginning of the Perestroika policy. The first to legalize the new dance were dancers from the Baltic republics. They presented this dance as the "protest against the arbitrariness of the capitalists", explaining that the dance was invented by Black Americans from poor neighborhoods. In 1985 the performance of Czech Jiří Korn was shown in the program "Morning Post", and became one of the first official demonstrations of breakdancing on Soviet television. With the support of the Leninist Young Communist League in 1986 breakdance festivals were held in the cities of the Baltic republics ( Tallinn , Palanga , Riga ). The next step was the spreading of the similar festivals to other Soviet republics. Festivals were held in Donetsk (Ukraine), Vitebsk (Belarus), Gorky (Russia). Breakdancing could be seen in Soviet cinema: Dancing on the Roof (1985), Courier (1986), Publication (1988). By the end of the decade the dance became almost ubiquitous. At almost any disco or school dance one could see a person dancing in the "robot" style. [47] In the early 1990s the country experienced a severe economic and political crisis. With the dissolution of the Soviet Union , the breakdance craze was over and breakdancing became dated. The next wave of interest in breakdancing in Russia would only occur in the late 90s. [47] China[ edit ] Although social media such as YouTube cannot be used in China, breakdancing in China has been popular. Many people copy breakdancing videos from abroad and distribute them back to the mainland. Although it is still an underground culture in China because of some restrictions, breakdancing was reported to be a growing presence in 2013. [48] Dance elements[ edit ] Gravity Benders crew showcasing the four elements of breakdancing — toprock , downrock , freezes , and power moves –  some crew choreography, and a short battle There are four primary elements that form breakdancing: toprock, downrock, power moves, and freezes. Toprock generally refers to any string of steps performed from a standing position. It is usually the first and foremost opening display of style, though dancers often transition from other aspects of breakdancing to toprock and back. Toprock has a variety of steps which can each be varied according to the dancer's expression (i.e. aggressive, calm, excited). A great deal of freedom is allowed in the definition of toprock: as long as the dancer maintains cleanliness, form, and attitude, theoretically anything can be toprock. Toprock can draw upon many other dance styles such as popping , locking , tap dance , Lindy hop , or house dance . Transitions from toprock to downrock and power moves are called "drops". [49] Downrock (also known as "footwork" or "floorwork") is used to describe any movement on the floor with the hands supporting the dancer as much as the feet. Downrock includes moves such as the foundational 6-step , and its variants such as the 3-step. The most basic of downrock is done entirely on feet and hands but more complex variations can involve the knees when threading limbs through each other. Power moves are acrobatic moves that require momentum , speed, endurance, strength, flexibility, and control to execute. The breaker is generally supported by his upper body while the rest of his body creates circular momentum. Some examples are the windmill , swipe , back spin, and head spin. Some power moves are borrowed from gymnastics and martial arts. An example of a power move taken from gymnastics is the Thomas Flair which is shortened and spelled flare in breakdancing. Freezes are stylish poses that require the breaker to suspend himself or herself off the ground using upper body strength in poses such as the pike . They are used to emphasize strong beats in the music and often signal the end of a set. Freezes can be linked into chains or "stacks" where breakers go from freeze to freeze to freeze in order to hit the beats of the music which displays musicality and physical strength. See also: Jaiva There are many individual styles used in breakdancing. Individual styles often stem from a dancer's region of origin and influences. However, some people such as Jacob "Kujo" Lyons believe that the internet inhibits individual style. In a 2012 interview with B-Boy Magazine he expressed his frustration: B-boys performing on San Francisco's Powell Street in 2008 B-Boy performing hand hops in Washington D.C. … because everybody watches the same videos online, everybody ends up looking very similar. The differences between individual b-boys, between crews, between cities/states/countries/continents, have largely disappeared. It used to be that you could tell what city a b-boy was from by the way he danced. Not anymore. But I've been saying these things for almost a decade, and most people don't listen, but continue watching the same videos and dancing the same way. It's what I call the "international style", or the "Youtube style". [50] Luis "Alien Ness" Martinez, the president of Mighty Zulu Kings, expressed a similar frustration in a separate interview three years earlier with "The Super B-Beat Show" about the top five things he hates in breakdancing: Oh yeah, the last thing I hate in breakin'… Yo, all y'all motherfuckin' internet b-boys... I'm an internet b-boy too, but I'm real about my shit. Everybody knows who I am, I'm out at every fucking jam, I'm in a different country every week. I tell my story dancing... I've been all around the world, y'all been all around the world wide web... [my friend] Bebe once said that shit, and I co-sign that, Bebe said that. That wasn't me but that's the realist shit I ever heard anybody say. I've been all around the world, you've been all around the world wide web. [51] Although there are some generalities in the styles that exist, many dancers combine elements of different styles with their own ideas and knowledge in order to create a unique style of their own. Breakers can therefore be categorized into a broad style which generally showcases the same types of techniques. Power: This style is what most members of the general public associate with the term "breakdancing". Power moves comprise full-body spins and rotations that give the illusion of defying gravity. Examples of power moves include head spins, back spins, windmills, flares, air tracks/air flares, 1990s, 2000s, jackhammers, crickets, turtles, hand glides, halos, and elbow spins. Those breakers who use "power moves" almost exclusively in their sets are referred to as "power heads". Abstract: A very broad style which may include the incorporation of "threading" footwork, freestyle movement to hit beats, house dance, and "circus" styles (tricks, contortion, etc.). Blow-up: A style which focuses on the "wow factor" of certain power moves, freezes, and circus styles. Blowups consist of performing a sequence of as many difficult trick combinations in as quick succession as possible in order to "smack" or exceed the virtuosity of the other breaker's performance. The names of some of these moves are air baby, hollow backs, solar eclipse, and reverse air baby, among others. The main goal in blow-up style is the rapid transition through a sequence of power moves ending in a skillful freeze or "suicide". Like freezes, a suicide is used to emphasize a strong beat in the music and signal the end to a routine. While freezes draw attention to a controlled final position, suicides draw attention to the motion of falling or losing control. B-boys or b-girls will make it appear that they have lost control and fall onto their backs, stomachs, etc. The more painful the suicide appears, the more impressive it is, but breakers execute them in a way to minimize pain. Flavor: A style that is based more on elaborate toprock, downrock, and/or freezes. This style is focused more on the beat and musicality of the song than having to rely on power moves only. Breakers who base their dance on "flavor" or style are known as "style heads". Music[ edit ] The musical selection for breakdancing is not restricted to hip-hop music as long as the tempo and beat pattern conditions are met. Breakdancing can be readily adapted to different music genres with the aid of remixing . The original songs that popularized the dance form borrow significantly from progressive genres of funk , soul , disco , electro , and jazz funk . A musical canon of these traditional b-boy songs have since developed, songs that were once expected to be played at every b-boying event. [37] As the dance form grew, this standardization of classic songs prompted innovation of dance moves and break beats that reimagined the standard melodies. These songs include “Give It Up or Turn It a Loose” by James Brown, “Apache” by the Incredible Bongo Band, and "The Mexican" by Babe Ruth to name a few. [37] [52] The most common feature of breakdance music exists in musical breaks , or compilations formed from samples taken from different songs which are then looped and chained together by the DJ. The tempo generally ranges between 110 and 135 beats per minute with shuffled sixteenth and quarter beats in the percussive pattern. History credits DJ Kool Herc for the invention of this concept [35] later termed the break beat . See also: Hip-hop dance § International competitions , and International B-Boy Championships Battle of the Year (BOTY) was founded in 1990 by Thomas Hergenröther in Germany. [53] It is the first and largest international breakdancing competition for breakdance crews. [54] BOTY holds regional qualifying tournaments in several countries such as Zimbabwe, Japan, Israel, Algeria, Indonesia, and the Balkans . Crews who win these tournaments go on to compete in the final championship in Montpellier , France. [53] BOTY was featured in the independent documentary Planet B-Boy (2007) that filmed five dance crews training for the 2005 championship. A 3D film Battle of the Year was released in January 2013. It was directed by Benson Lee who also directed Planet B-Boy. [55] The Notorious IBE is a Dutch-based breakdancing competition founded in 1998. [56] IBE (International Breakdance Event) is not a traditional competition because there are not any stages or judges. Instead, there are timed competitive events that take place in large multitiered ciphers—circular dance spaces surrounded by observers—where the winners are determined by audience approval. [56] There are several kinds of events such as the b-girl crew battle, the Seven 2 Smoke battle (eight top ranked breakers battle each other to determine the overall winner), the All vs. All continental battle (all the American breakers vs. all the European breakers vs. the Asian breakers vs. Mexican/Brazilian breakers), and the Circle Prinz IBE. [56] The Circle Prinz IBE is a knockout tournament that takes place in multiple smaller cipher battles until the last standing breaker is declared the winner. [56] IBE also hosts the European finals for the UK B-Boy Championships. [57] Chelles Battle Pro was created in 2001 and it is held every year in Chelles, France . There are two competitions. One is a kids competition for solo breakers who are 12 years old or younger. The other competition is a knock-out tournament for eight breaker crews. Some crews have to qualify at their country's local tournament; others are invited straight to the finale. [58] Red Bull BC One was created in 2004 by Red Bull and is hosted in a different country every year. [59] The competition brings together the top 16 breakers from around the world. [59] Six spots are earned through six regional qualifying tournaments. The other 10 spots are reserved for last year's winner, wild card selections, and recommendations from an international panel of experts. A past participant of the competition is world record holder Mauro "Cico" (pronounced CHEE-co) Peruzzi. B-boy Cico holds the world record in the 1990s. A 1990 is a move in which a breaker spins continuously on one hand—a hand spin rather than a head spin. Cico broke the record by spinning 27 times. [60] [61] A documentary based on the competition called Turn It Loose (2009) profiled six breakdancers' training for the 2007 championship in Johannesburg. [62] Two of these breakdancers were Ali " Lilou " Ramdani from Pockémon Crew and Omar " Roxrite " Delgado from Squadron. A breakdancer does an air-flare in a cypher at R16 Korea 2014 R16 Korea is a South Korean breakdancing competition founded in 2007 by Asian Americans Charlie Shin and John Jay Chon. [63] Like BOTY and Red Bull BC One put together, Respect16 is a competition for the top 16 ranked crews in the world. [64] What sets it apart from other competitions is that it is sponsored by the government and broadcast live on Korean television and in several countries in Europe. [63] In 2011, R16 instituted a new judging system that was created to eliminate bias and set a unified and fair standard for the way breakdance battles should be judged. [65] With the new system, breakers are judged against five criteria: foundation, dynamics (power moves), battle, originality, and execution. There is one judge for each category and the scores are shown on a large screen during battles so that the audience can see who is winning at any given moment. [66] The Youth Olympic Games incorporated breakdancing as part of its programme, starting with the 2018 Summer Youth Olympics in Buenos Aires . Breakdancing is eligible for inclusion as it is a discipline of dancesport , which is recognised by the International Olympic Committee . The competition features men's, women's and mixed-team events in a one-on-one battle format. [67] The 2024 Summer Olympics in Paris will see breakdancing make its Olympic debut. 16 male and 16 female breakdancers will compete in head-to-head matches. [68] [69] IOC President Thomas Bach stated that they added breakdancing as part of an effort to draw more interest from young people in the Olympics. [70] Female presence[ edit ] A female breaker performs in São Paulo , Brazil. Similar to other hip-hop subcultures, such as graffiti writing, rapping , and DJing , breakers are predominantly male, but this is not to say that women breakers, b-girls, are invisible or nonexistent. Female participants, such as Daisy Castro (also known as Baby Love of Rock Steady Crew), attest that females have been breakdancing since its inception. [71] Critics argue that it is unfair to make a sweeping generalization about these inequalities because women have begun to play a larger role in the breakdancing scene. [72] [73] Some people have pointed to a lack of promotion as a barrier, as full-time b-girl Firefly stated in a BBC piece: "It's getting more popular. There are a lot more girls involved. The problem is that promoters are not putting on enough female-only battles." [74] [75] Growing interest is being shown in changing the traditional image of females in hip-hop culture (and by extension, breakdance culture) to a more positive, empowered role in the modern hip-hop scene. [76] [77] [78] In 2018, Japan's B-Girl Ami became the first B-Girl world champion of Red Bull BC One. [79] Although B-Girl Ayumi had been invited as a competitor for the 2017 championship, it was only until 2018 that a 16 B-Girl bracket was featured as part of the main event. Media exposure[ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2007) (
Toggle the table of contents Pole dance (Redirected from Pole dancing ) Form of performing art This article may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may interest only a particular audience. Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy . (July 2019) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Pole dance combines dance and acrobatics centered around a vertical pole. The origins of pole dancing can be traced back to the sport of mallakhamb . [1] This performance art form takes place not only in gentleman's clubs as erotic dance , but also as a mainstream form of fitness, practiced in gyms and dedicated dance studios. [2] Pole dancing enthusiasts are of all ages; although many who perform this dance and acrobatic form are adults, that does not stop younger children from learning and performing in competitions. [3] Amateur and professional pole dancing competitions are held in countries around the world. Pole dancer performing in 2015 Pole dance requires significant muscular endurance, coordination, strength, flexibility, upper body and core stability , as well as sensuality. [4] As such, proper instruction and rigorous training are necessary to attain proficiency. [5] [6] Today, pole performances by exotic dancers range from basic spins and striptease in more intimate clubs to athletic moves such as climbs and body inversions in the "stage heavy" clubs of Las Vegas and Miami. Dancer Remy Redd at the King of Diamonds , for example, is famous for flipping herself upside down into a split and hanging from the ceiling. [7] Since the mid-2000s, promoters of pole dance fitness competitions have tried to change peoples' perception of pole dance to include pole fitness as a non-sexual form of dance and acrobatics and are trying to move pole into the Olympics as pole sports . Pole dance is regarded as a form of exercise [8] which can be used as both an aerobic and anaerobic workout. Recognized schools and qualifications are now commonplace. [9] Pole dancer performing Pole dancer using a street pole The use of a pole for sports and exercise dates back at least 800 years to the traditional Indian sport of mallakhamb , which employs endurance and strength principles with a wooden pole wider in diameter than a modern standard pole. The Chinese pole, dating back to the 12th century, uses two poles on which men would perform "gravity-defying tricks" as they leap from pole to pole, at approximately twenty feet in the air. [10] Pole dance in America has its roots in the "Little Egypt" traveling sideshows of the 1890s, which featured sensual "Kouta Kouta" or "Hoochie Coochie" belly dances, [11] performed mostly by Ghawazi dancers making their first appearance in America. [12] In an era where women dressed modestly in corsets, the dancers, dressed in short skirts and richly adorned in jewelry, caused quite a stir. [13] [14] During the 1920s, dancers introduced pole by sensually gyrating on the wooden tent poles to attract crowds. [15] The rock and roll invasion in the 1950s saw the introduction of the pole to a broader audience, with Elvis Presley's "Jailhouse Rock" movie and video in 1957. The video featured Presley's famous gyrating hips as well as numerous pole slides, grinds, and twirls. [16] Eventually, the pole dancing moved from tents to bars and combined with burlesque dance. Since the 1980s, pole dancing has incorporated athletic moves such as climbs, spins, and inversions into striptease routines, first in Canada and then in the United States. In the 1990s, pole dancing commenced being taught as art by Fawnia Mondey, a Canadian who moved to Las Vegas, US. She is known as the world's first pole dancing instructor. [17] Since then, pole dancing classes have become a popular form of recreational and competitive sport, practiced and performed in a variety of sexual, non-sexual, and athletic settings. K.T. Coates, a famed competitive pole dancer, and the International Pole Sports Federation , are currently promoting a campaign to include competitive pole dance in the Olympics and an application was made to the International Olympic Committee to recognise pole as a sport in September 2016. [18] Numerous competitions exist, including the World Pole Sport Championship, U.S. Pole Federation Championship, Pole Art, Miss Pole Dance America, and the International Pole Masters Cup Championship. [19] Standard pole[ edit ] There are various dance pole types to suit different performance situations. Dance poles may be permanent or portable, have different sizes, have spinning and static modes, have different coatings, or be made from different materials. [20] The standard dance pole typically consists of a hollow chrome, steel , or brass pole with a circular cross-section, running from floor to ceiling. Affixing at the ceiling gives more stability but is not always realized, especially at nightclubs with higher roofs or at transportable devices. [20] Dance poles that are permanent are fixed to the ceiling supported by a beam located in the roof, and they are set to the floor by different brackets and bearings. Portable poles are attached to a base or a mobile stage and do not need to be attached to the ceiling. These poles can easily be removed, dismantled, and fit into cases for transport. [20] Poles come in a variety of diameters – 50 mm, 48 mm, 45 mm, 42 mm, 40 mm and 38 mm. The diameter used normally depends on personal preferences and what the pole will be used for—e.g., competitions or studio use. [21] [22] In the United States, the diameter is usually 50 mm (2 inches), or the now more popular 45 mm (1.75 inches), allowing it to be gripped comfortably with one hand. [21] In Asia, the diameter is usually 45 mm or less. [23] In Australia a 38 mm pole is popular. [21] Poles come in various materials and coatings, each of which possesses its own properties, advantages, and disadvantages. The materials poles are made of are brass, titanium–gold, stainless steel and chrome. [20] The brass and titanium–gold poles are gold in colour and are used to enhance the grip between the pole and the dancer, and are normally used by more advanced dancers. The stainless steel poles are not as popular as the other types as they do not have the finest grip; however, they are used by dancers with sensitive skin. The chrome poles are silver in colour and are most popular amongst beginners. The finishes some dance poles may possess are silicone sleeves and powder coatings. Silicone sleeves can provide maximum grip, although there are safety precautions dancers must consider before using silicone sleeves. These measures may include a great amount of clothing worn by the dancer or performing only static moves. Poles that are coated in powder provide improved friction and grip for dancers. [24] [25] Dance poles may have two different modes, spinning and static. In the spinning mode, the pole uses ball bearings to spin. This mode can be used to complete more experienced pole moves, make moves easier to complete, and add a more dramatic effect to the move. Most spinning poles can also be fixed to the static mode where the pole cannot rotate. The static mode is regularly used when pole dancing is first taught to beginners. [20] Products such as chalk or alcohol-silica solutions may be used to help "stick" to the pole. Competitions may limit which products performers use. [26] Show pole[ edit ] There are now poles available for use in clubs that provide visual effects. These poles are made with clear plastics and contain water, glitter, and unique reflective materials, which stand out when used in conjunction with strobe lighting , as well as lighting hidden in their base joists. However,  these poles are not favorable to a dancer wanting to achieve better pole tricks as they bend slightly and tend to create a friction burn when slid down with any speed. Pole dancing demonstration near the Idaho State Capitol Pole dancing has gained popularity as a form of exercise with increased awareness of the benefits to general strength and fitness . These forms of exercise increase core and general body strength by using the body itself as resistance while toning the body as a whole. A typical pole dance exercise regimen in class begins with strength training , dance-based moves, squats , push-ups , and sit-ups and gradually works its way up to the spins, climbs and inversions which are the métier of the exercise. Pole dancing is also generally reported by its schools to be empowering for women in terms of building self-confidence , in terms of which its erotic components are still the subject of some controversy. [27] A growing number of men are incorporating pole dancing into their fitness programmes. [28] In Australia, the UK and the US, dance studios are beginning to offer classes just for men. And in China, 2007's National Pole Dancing competition was won by a man. Dance instructor Zhang Peng, 23, beat a host of women dancers to the top prize. [29] Recreational pole[ edit ] Since 2003,[ further explanation needed ] pole dancing has been transitioning from an exotic performance to a recreational activity. Pole dancing as a sport differs from pole dancing as a recreation as recreational pole dancing is undertaken mainly for enjoyment rather than fitness. Whilst undertaking pole class, students will learn a variety of different ways to use the pole to execute spins, tricks, climbs, hangs, drops and flips. [30] [31] Competitions[ edit ] Pole dance competitions began in the United States with the Deja Vu chain of strip clubs in 1991 with an event called the Po'Lympics, which was held annually throughout the decade. [32] These competitions led to the creation of numerous other competitions that followed, both in the strip club industry and fitness. A wide range of amateur and professional competitions are held in many countries worldwide. They are strictly non-nude and focus on pole dance as an athletic and artistic form of dance and fitness. The first "Miss Pole Dance World" competition was held in November 2005 in Amsterdam and Elena Gibson from the UK won the championship. The following day Elena was disqualified by the organizer John Benner amongst much controversy and the title went to the runner up Reiko Suemune from Japan . [33] Main article: Pole sports A group of advocates pushed for pole dance to be represented as a test event in the 2012 London Olympics. [34] [35] However, since this was a relatively new trend, there was no standardized scoring for competitions and technique descriptions vary among clubs in different regions at that time. [36] To overcome this, in 2009 the International Pole Sports Federation was founded to turn pole dance into a sport, pole sport . The IPSF has since then created rules and regulations to govern pole sports, such as a code of points, policies regarding health and safety, and certification for sports officials. [37] National federations work with the IPSF on implementing these standards in national pole sports competitions. National pole sports federations associated with the IPSF now exist in multiple continents, [38] from Africa to Asia, and other federations are in the process of creating a structured plan to become endorsed by the IPSF. The IPSF each year arrange the World Pole Championships to which each country with an associated national pole sports federation sends their top pole dancers. IPSF is again working on getting the sport recognized and to become an Olympic Sport. [39] In the media[ edit ] Chinese pole acrobats perform In 1993, in Madonna 's world tour The Girlie Show , dancer Carrie Ann Inaba performed on a tall go-go pole as an intro to the show. This was followed by Madonna's performance of " Erotica ". Pole dancing, which has been featured on Desperate Housewives and The View , [40] like other exercise trends has its share of celebrity following. Jennifer Love Hewitt had a short pole dancing stint in an episode of " Ghost Whisperer ". Actress Sheila Kelley was so taken with the sport, which she learned while preparing for her role in Dancing at the Blue Iguana , that she launched her pole-based exercise programme. [41] In January 2009, Felix Cane (Miss Pole Dance World champion 2009 and 2010) joined Cirque Du Soleil's Zumanity show in Las Vegas, promoted on the Tyra Banks Show in 2010. [42] [43] Rima Fakih 's victory at Miss USA 2010 , including the fact that she had won a pole-dancing competition three years earlier, attracted media attention. [44] Taiwanese pop singer Jolin Tsai showed her pole dancing skills in the music videos of "Agent J" and "Beast". She also gave a double pole-dancing live performance during her Myself World Tour in Kaohsiung , Taiwan . Pole dance has its own media, the magazines Free Spin, Pole Spin and Vertical. [45] Pole dance is also the main subject of a famous webcomic titled, "Pole Dancing Adventures" [46] created by artist, Leen Isabel. In the video game Bayonetta , the titular character uses pole dancing to advance to the next area or combat her foes. In the ending credit to the game, she is seen dancing on the pole. [47] If you get a platinum award, you'll hear her say, "I should have been a pole dancer". Pole dancing has been incorporated in the performances of some K-Pop Idols. Ga-In of the Brown Eyed Girls included a few shots of her pole dancing in the music video of her 2012 solo single 피어나 (Bloom) . [48] Girl group After School used pole dancing extensively as part of the dance routine for their 2013 song 첫사랑 (First Love) . [49] Rihanna's hit single from 2013 " Pour it up " featured Professional Pole Dancer Nicole 'The Pole' Williams. [50] Nicole also danced to Bruno Mars "Gorilla" at the MTV EMAs 2013. [51] Pole dancing is referenced in the fighting game Persona 4 Arena Ultimax by the fighter Shadow Rise: The Scandalous Superstar Idol whenever she wins a fight. One of her animations is where she strips her clothes off and twirls on a pole like a pole dancer, which could also reference how Rise's dungeon in the first Persona 4 game is a strip club. In 2015, Celebrity Health & Fitness magazine reported "royal bodyguards" as saying that Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge took pole dancing lessons to lose weight after giving birth to Prince George in 2013. [52] In 2016, Daily Dot [53] ran a story which covered the attempt by some pole dancers to distance themselves from strippers, with their story "Strippers Talk Back to the hashtag #Notastripper". The story utilized the hashtag "yes a stripper" to support the origins of pole dance. On the social media platform Instagram, some pole dancers try to differentiate between their exercise method and the technique's origin by using "not a stripper" as a hashtag. The hashtag can be viewed as derogatory, and pole dancing strippers utilize "yes a stripper" as a defense against the denigration of their dance style, which is created and used in strip clubs. The 2019 film Hustlers brought positive attention to the sport. Focused on the lives of strippers in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis , the film cast members of the New York stripping community, including rap icon Cardi B and Lizzo. [54] Jennifer Lopez performed intricate routines in the film - notably to Fiona Apple's Criminal - and went on to pole dance in the 2020 Super Bowl . After the release of the film and Lopez's subsequent interviews,  pole dancing studios nationwide saw a surge in registrations. [55] In 2019, English musician FKA Twigs released a music video to her single " Cellophane " which includes Twigs pole dancing. [56] Pole dance figures heavily in the STARZ television series, P-Valley . The English singer Piri took up pole fitness while at Lancaster University , and performed it on stage as part of Froge.tour . [57]
Toggle the table of contents Belly dance From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of Middle Eastern dance "Belly dancer" redirects here. For other uses, see Belly dancer (disambiguation) . This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. (October 2023) Belly dancer on a Cairo dinner cruise This article is part of a series on lit. 'oriental dance') is a  Egyptian dance [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] that originated in Egypt , [6] which features movements of the hips and torso. [2] It has evolved to take many different forms depending on the country and region, both in costume and dance style; with the Egyptian styles and costumes being the most recognized worldwide due to Egyptian cinema . [7] [8] Belly dancing in its various styles and forms is popular worldwide with many schools around the globe practicing it. [9] Names and terminology[ edit ] "Belly dance" is a translation of the French term danse du ventre. The name first appeared in 1864 in a review of the Orientalist painting The Dance of the Almeh by Jean-Léon Gérôme . [10] [11] The first known use of the term "belly dance" in English is found in Charles James Wills, In the land of the lion and sun: or, Modern Persia (1883). [12] Raqs sharqi ('Eastern Dance' or 'Dance of the Orient') is a broad category of professional forms of the dance, including forms of belly dance popularly known today, such as Raqs Baladi, Sa'idi, Ghawazee, and Awalim. The informal, social form of the dance is known as Raqs Baladi ('Dance of the Country' or 'Folk Dance') in Egyptian Arabic and is considered an indigenous dance.[ citation needed ] Belly dancer Randa Kamel performing in Cairo, 2007 Belly dance is primarily a torso-driven dance, with an emphasis on articulations of the hips. [13] Unlike many Western dance forms, the focus of the dance is on isolations of the torso muscles, rather than on movements of the limbs through space. Although some of these isolations appear similar to the isolations used in jazz ballet, they are sometimes driven differently and have a different feeling or emphasis. Movements found in belly dance[ edit ] In common with most folk dances, there is no universal naming scheme for belly dance movements. Many dancers and dance schools have developed their own naming schemes, but none of these is universally recognized. The following attempt at categorization reflects the most common naming conventions: [14] Percussive: Staccato movements, most commonly of the hips, used to punctuate the music or accent a beat.  Lifts or drops of the hips, chest or rib cage, shoulder accents, hip rocks, hits, and twists. Fluid: Flowing, sinuous movements in which the body is in continuous motion, used to interpret melodic lines and lyrical sections in the music, or modulated to express complex instrumental improvisations. These movements require a great deal of abdominal muscle control. Typical movements include horizontal and vertical figures of 8 or infinity loops with the hips, horizontal or tilting hip circles, and undulations of the hips and abdomen. These basic shapes may be varied, combined, and embellished to create an infinite variety of complex, textured movements. Shimmies, shivers and vibrations: Small, fast, continuous movements of the hips or ribcage, which create an impression of texture and depth of movement. Shimmies are commonly layered over other movements, and are often used to interpret rolls on the tablah or riq or fast strumming of the oud or qanun . There are many types of shimmy, varying in size and method of generation. Some common shimmies include relaxed, up and down hip shimmies, straight-legged knee-driven shimmies, fast, tiny hip vibrations, twisting hip shimmies, bouncing 'earthquake' shimmies, and relaxed shoulder or rib cage shimmies. In addition to these torso movements, dancers in many styles will use level changes, traveling steps, turns, and spins. The arms are used to frame and accentuate movements of the hips, for dramatic gestures, and to create beautiful lines and shapes with the body. Other movements may be used as occasional accents, such as low kicks and arabesques, backbends, and head tosses. In the Middle East[ edit ] Origins and history[ edit ] La danse de l'almée (The Dance of the Almeh) by Jean-Léon Gérôme, 1863 Belly dancing is believed to have had a long history in the Middle East . [2] Several Greek and Roman sources including Juvenal and Martial describe dancers from Asia Minor and Spain using undulating movements, playing castanets , and sinking to the floor with "quivering thighs", descriptions that are certainly suggestive of the movements that are today associated with belly dance. [15] Later, particularly in the 18th and 19th centuries, European travellers in the Middle East such as Edward Lane and Flaubert wrote extensively of the dancers they saw there, including the Awalim and Ghawazi of Egypt.[ citation needed ] In his book, Andrew Hammond notes that practitioners of the art form agree that belly dance is lodged especially in Egyptian culture, he states: "the Greek historian Herodotus related the remarkable ability of Egyptians to create for themselves spontaneous fun, singing, clapping, and dancing in boats on the Nile during numerous religious festivals. It's from somewhere in this great, ancient tradition of gaiety that the belly dance emerged." [16] The courtly pleasures of the Umayyad , Abbasid and Fatimid caliphs included belly dancing, soirée and singing. Belly dancers and singers were sent from all parts of the vast empire to entertain. [17] In the Ottoman Empire , belly dance was performed by women and later, by boys, in the sultan's palace. [18] Social context[ edit ] Belly dance in Egypt has two distinct social contexts: as a folk or social dance. As a social dance, belly dance (also called Raqs Baladi or Raqs Shaabi in this context) is performed at celebrations and social gatherings by ordinary people (male and female, young and old), in their ordinary clothes. [19] In more conservative or traditional societies, these events may be gender segregated, with separate parties where men and women dance separately. [20] Historically, professional dance performers were the Awalim (primarily musicians and poets), Ghawazi . The Maazin sisters may have been the last authentic performers of Ghawazi dance in Egypt, with Khayreyya Maazin still teaching and performing as of 2020. [21] [22] Belly dancing is part of Egyptian culture, and is part of Arabic culture as a whole. [23] [24] Throughout the Middle East and the Arab diaspora , belly dancing is closely associated with Arabic music that is modern classical (known as "al-jadid"). [25] Main article: Raqs sharqi Layla Taj, Egyptian belly dancer, performing in Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt In the 1870s, Shafiqa al-Qibtiyya was the most famous bellydancer in all of Egypt's theatres and casinos, she was admired by the nation and widely celebrated. [26] The modern Egyptian belly dance style and the modern belly dance costumes of the 19th century were featured by the Awalim. [27] For example, many of the dancers in Badia's Casinos went on to appear in Egyptian films and had a great influence on the development of the Egyptian style and became famous, like Samia Gamal and Taheyya Kariokka , both of whom helped attract eyes to the Egyptian style worldwide. [28] Professional belly dance in Cairo has not been exclusive to native Egyptians, although the country prohibited foreign-born dancers from obtaining licenses for solo work for much of 2004 out of concern that potentially inauthentic performances would dilute its culture. (Other genres of performing arts were not affected.) The ban was lifted in September 2004, but a culture of exclusivity and selectivity remained. The few non-native Egyptians permitted to perform in an authentic way invigorated the dance circuit and helped spread global awareness of the art form. [29] American-born Layla Taj is one example of a non-native Egyptian belly dancer who has performed extensively in Cairo and the Sinai resorts. [30] Egyptian belly dance is noted for its controlled, precise movements. [31] Although belly dance is traditionally seen as a feminine art, the number of male belly dancers has increased in recent years. [32] In Turkey[ edit ] Belly dance is referred to in Turkey as Oryantal Dans, or simply 'Oryantal' literally meaning orient . Many professional dancers and musicians in Turkey continue to be of Romani heritage, and the Roma people of Turkey have had a strong influence on the Turkish style. [33] In Turkey the style of belly dance is lively and playful, with a greater outward projection of energy than the more contained Egyptian style.[ citation needed ] In Turkey dancers are known for their energetic, athletic (even gymnastic ) style, and their adept use of finger cymbals , also known as zils , which are commonly used in Egyptian style and movies.  Connoisseurs of Turkish style often say a dancer who cannot play the zils is not an accomplished dancer.[ citation needed ] Floorwork, which has been banned in Egypt since the mid-20th century, is still a part of Turkish belly dance.[ citation needed ] Another distinguishing element of Turkish style is the use of a 98 rhythm,[ citation needed ] divided as 2+2+2+3, often referred to as the Karsilama rhythm. Karşilama, in Turkish dance, is not a rhythm but a folk dance performed in a line, whereas a 98 (dokuz sekiz) rhythm defines the count of the rhythm and is used in both karşilama and Roman havasi. Belly dance in the musical industry[ edit ] Influence in pop music[ edit ] Belly dance today is a dance used by various artists among which are Rihanna , Beyoncé , Fergie , however the greatest representative of this dance is the Colombian singer Shakira , [34] who led this dance to position it as her trademark, with her songs Whenever Wherever and Ojos Así , however thanks to the song Hips Don't Lie , her hip dance skills became known worldwide. Also, thanks to Whenever Wherever in 2001, the belly dance fever began popularizing it in a large part of Latin America and later taking it to the United States. Over time in her presentations Shakira added this dance mixing it with Latin dances, like Salsa [35] and Afro-Colombian, and she also  she expressed that she began to dance these movements since she was little thanks to her Lebanese grandmother. Nowadays the belly dance is a characteristic dance of this singer which presented a variant with a rope entangling it in her body and dancing to the rhythm of Whenever Wherever. Shakira is the only artist in the music industry who has used belly dance on several occasions in her artistic career. [36] She inspired Beyoncé to explore this type of dance in her Beautiful Liar collaboration where she also acted as choreographer. At the Super Bowl LIV Halftime Show event she returned to the belly dance with rope during the transition from Ojos así thus to Whenever Wherever . [37] Today this dance is considered a symbol in Shakira's career and undoubtedly a distinctive dance of her as she's also mixing it with Latin style. She is the second artist to have a distinctive dance in the music industry alongside Michael Jackson and the moonwalk.[ citation needed ] Outside the Middle East[ edit ] A belly dancer on stage in Japan, 2016 This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) ( Learn how and when to remove this template message ) Belly dance was popularized in the West during the Romantic movement of the 18th and 19th centuries, when Orientalist artists depicted romanticized images of harem life in the Ottoman Empire . Belly dancing has become popular outside the Arab world , and American, European, and Japanese women who have become professional belly dancers dance all over Europe and the Middle East. [38] In North America[ edit ] Although there were dancers of this type at the 1876 Centennial in Philadelphia, it was not until the 1893 Chicago World's Fair that it gained national attention. The term "belly dancing" is often credited to Sol Bloom , the Fair's entertainment director, but he referred to the dance as danse du ventre, the name used by the French in Algeria. In his memoirs, Bloom states, "when the public learned that the literal translation was "belly dance", they delightedly concluded that it must be salacious and immoral ... I had a gold mine." Authentic dancers from several Middle Eastern and North African countries performed at the Fair, including Syria, Turkey and Algeria—but it was the dancers in the Egyptian Theater of The Street in the Cairo exhibit who gained the most notoriety. The fact that the dancers were uncorseted and gyrated their hips was shocking to Victorian sensibilities. There were no soloists, but it is claimed that a dancer nicknamed Little Egypt stole the show. Some claim the dancer was Farida Mazar Spyropoulos , but this fact is disputed. [39] The popularity of these dancers subsequently spawned dozens of imitators, many of whom claimed to be from the original troupe. Victorian society continued to be affronted by the dance, and dancers were sometimes arrested and fined. [40] The dance was nicknamed the " hoochie coochie ", or the shimmy and shake. A short film, "Fatima's Dance", was widely distributed in the Nickelodeon theaters. It drew criticism for its "immodest" dancing, and was eventually censored. Belly dance drew men in droves to burlesque theaters, and to carnival and circus lots. Thomas Edison made several films of dancers in the 1890s. These included a Turkish dance, and Crissie Sheridan in 1897, [41] and Princess Rajah from 1904, [42] which features a dancer playing zills , doing "floor work", and balancing a chair in her teeth. American tribal fusion dancer Rachel Brice Ruth St. Denis also used Middle Eastern-inspired dance in D. W. Griffith's silent film Intolerance , her goal being to lift dance to a respectable art form at a time when dancers were considered to be women of loose morals. Hollywood began producing films such as The Sheik , Cleopatra , and Salomé , to capitalize on Western fantasies of the orient.[ citation needed ] When immigrants from Arab states began to arrive in New York in the 1930s, dancers started to perform in nightclubs and restaurants. In the late 1960s and early 1970s many dancers began teaching. Middle Eastern or Eastern bands took dancers with them on tour, which helped spark interest in the dance.[ citation needed ] Although using Turkish and Egyptian movements and music, American Cabaret ("AmCab") belly dancing has developed its own distinctive style, using props and encouraging audience interaction.[ citation needed ] In 1987, a distinctively American style of group improvisational dance, American Tribal Style Belly Dance , (ATS), was created, representing a major departure from the dance's cultural origins.  A unique and wholly modern style, it makes use of steps from existing cultural dance styles, including those from India, the Middle East, and Africa. [43] Many forms of "Tribal Fusion" belly dance have also developed, appropriating elements from many other dance and music styles including flamenco , ballet, burlesque , hula hoop and even hip hop . "Gothic Belly Dance" is a style which incorporates elements from Goth subculture . Continuing from this tradition is the emergence of touring theatrical belly dance productions such as Belly Dance Evolution produced by Jillina Carlano , Invaders of the Heart produced by Myra Krien amongst others. [44]
Toggle the table of contents Square dance From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dance for four couples arranged in a square This article is about all the different forms of square dance. For specific details on the American traditional forms, see Traditional square dance .  For specific details on the standardized American form, see Modern western square dance . For other uses, see Square dance (disambiguation) . This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . Learn how and when to remove this template message ) This article possibly contains original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (April 2016) ( ) The Bent Creek Ranch Square Dance Team dancing at the Mountain Music Festival in Asheville, North Carolina . A square dance is a dance for four couples, or eight dancers in total, arranged in a square, with one couple on each side, facing the middle of the square. Square dances are part of a broad spectrum of dances known by various names: country dances, traditional dances, folk dances, barn dances, ceilidh dances, contra dances, Playford dances, etc. These dances appear in over 100 different formations, [1] of which the Square and the Longways Set are by far the most popular formations. Square dances contain elements from numerous traditional dances including English country dances , which were first documented in 17th-century England, and 18th-century French quadrilles and cotillions ; [2] square dancing travelled to North America with the European settlers and developed significantly there. Square dancing is done in many different styles all around the world. [3] In some countries and regions, through preservation and repetition, square dances have attained the status of a folk dance . Square dancing is strongly associated with the United States, in part due to its association with the romanticized image of the American cowboy in the 20th century, [4] and 31 states have designated it as their official state dance . [5] The main North American types of square dances include traditional square dance and modern western square dance , which is widely known and danced worldwide. Other main types popular in England, Ireland, and Scotland include Playford dances, regional folk dances, ceili , Irish set dances , and Scottish country dances . The couples in a square are numbered, although numbering varies among different types. In many of the types, two of the couples are known as heads and the other two are called sides. In most American forms of square dance, the dancers are prompted or cued through a sequence of steps by a caller to the beat (and, in some traditions, the phrasing) of music. In other variations, dancers have no caller and instead memorize and perform a specific routine and sequence of steps. Square dance music varies widely, with some forms using traditional tunes and others employing more modern types. Dances can be organized by square dance clubs , bands, individuals, or similar organizations. Attire varies by type, with some forms possessing a specific dress code and others having no requirements. The standard square formation can also vary at times to include more or fewer dancers or arrange dancers in a different shape. History[ edit ] A square dance diagram from The English Dancing Master (First published in 1651) The origins of Square dances can be traced back to steps and figures used in traditional folk dances and social dances from many countries. One of the earliest influences may have been the Morris dance , an English dance for six men involving a line formation and energetic steps. [6] This dance is closely related to another ancestor of square dancing, English country dance , which included a variety of dances for groups of couples arranged in circles, lines, or squares. [6] In 1651, John Playford published 105 of these dances in The English Dancing Master , eight of which are square dances exhibiting concepts still in use, such as the head couples performing an action and the side couples repeating it. [7] Three of the dances, such as "Dull Sir John", specifically use the term square dance in the phrase, "A Square Dance for eight thus". [8] In the early 1800s, English country dances merged with French dances to form the quadrille , a dance for four couples in a square. [6] These dances further evolved in America, where they arrived with European settlers. [9] After the American Revolution, the quadrille became especially popular. [10] Quadrilles were originally danced from memorized steps and sequences, but as African American slaves played music for the dances, they began calling out the steps. [9] This practice became common by the early 1900s and gave rise to the modern caller. [9] Between 1940 and 1960, modern western square dance evolved from the western style of traditional square dance that had formed in the United States. Traditional western square dancing was promoted beginning in the 1930s by Lloyd Shaw , who solicited definitions from callers across the country in order to preserve that dance form and make it available to other teachers. [4] The American folk music revival in New York City in the 1950s was rooted in the resurgent interest in square dancing and folk dancing there in the 1940s, which gave musicians such as Pete Seeger popular exposure. [11] [12] [13] Main types[ edit ] Square dances are considered folk dances in many countries and regions, although the term square dance varies. In the United States the term is used for dances in square formations and also refers to the dance events where square dances are performed. In England, Ireland, and Scotland, the term is used less frequently, and many dance events involve dances in square, circle, and line formations. The term has also become associated with barn dances , where many different formations of dance are used. United States and Canada[ edit ] Traditional square dance[ edit ] Further information: Traditional square dance Modern Appalachian square dancing Also called old-time square dance or quadrilles by some older New England callers in recognition of the dance it descended from, traditional square dance is not standardized and can be subdivided into three main regional styles: Northeast/ New England , Southeast/ Appalachian , and Western. [4] The New England and Appalachian styles have been particularly well documented in the early U.S. and have survived to the 21st century. There are several other styles, some of which have survived or been revived while others have not. Where traditional square dance has been revived, it encompasses a wide range of new choreography. Traditional square dance structure varies by region, [4] but it usually consists of a limited number of calls occurring in a set order. Traditional square dance is frequently presented in alternation with contra dances , particularly in revival groups, or with some form of freestyle couple dancing at surviving local events. Modern western square dance[ edit ] Further information: Modern western square dance Modern western square dance, which is also called western square dance, contemporary western square dance, or modern American square dance, evolved from the western style of traditional square dance. Industrialist Henry Ford popularized the form. Ford believed that Jews invented jazz as a plot to corrupt society and that this plot could be counteracted by returning America to dances and musical styles that he saw as traditional and white. As a result, beginning in the early 1920s, he used his wealth to promote square dancing, through books and square dancing events. Ford also promoted square dance classes in public school, which were present in half of all American schools by 1928 as part of the standard physical education curriculum. Modern western square dance evolved in square dance events funded by Ford, using direction and guidance prepared by Colorado school superintendent Lloyd "Pappy" Shaw. [14] Since the 1970s, modern western square dance has been promoted and standardized by Callerlab , the International Association of Square Dance Callers. [15] A square dance in Montreal , Quebec in 1941 The initial stage reached by all dancers is called Mainstream. This program consists of a core list of about 70 moves which is revised periodically. [16] [17] Modern western square dance is sometimes presented in alternation with round dances . This modern form of square dancing is taught in around 30 countries, including the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, Belgium, France, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Australia, China, Japan, and Russia. Within Europe, the majority of square dance clubs are in Germany and the United Kingdom. All teach the Callerlab syllabus, but there are slight style and call title variations throughout the world. Because of this standardization, anyone with the proper training can dance modern western square dancing in many countries around the world. Instruction is typically given in the local language, but the calls are always in English, allowing people to dance internationally once they learn the calls. United Kingdom and Ireland[ edit ] Playford dances[ edit ] Also called English country dances, Playford-style dances originated from the dances published in John Playford's book The English Dancing Master. Some of the square dances listed in the book, such as "Newcastle", have survived to the 21st century, and countless new dances have been written in the Playford style. These dances include a range of moves, from smooth, gentle steps to more energetic leaps. [18] They are supported by the English Folk Dance and Song Society . [19] Regional folk dances[ edit ] Many traditional English regional folk dances are square dances that have survived into the 21st century. For instance, in both the Goathland square eight and the Cumberland square eight, which originated from different English villages, dancers perform a series of memorized moves in a square formation. [20] [21] Many of these dances are danced at folk or barn dances, along with other types of square dances including Playford dances; dances derived from the quadrille, such as "La Russe" published by H.D. Willock in the Manual of Dancing ( c. 1847); American traditional square dances; and countless new square dances written in the 20th and 21st centuries. Further information: Ceili dance and Cèilidh Irish ceili dances cover a wide range of formations, including many square dances. They are often performed at traditional Irish and Scottish social gatherings called cèilidhs. Cèilidhs are also held in England, where the same squares may be done as at folk dances or barn dances but with more stepping, including skip steps, hop steps, polka steps, and rants. Irish set dance[ edit ] Further information: Irish set dance Irish set dance is a square dance with strong regional associations. The dance involves stepping, often with a flat-foot polka step. Unlike in traditional and modern western square dancing, where couples are designated as heads or sides, couples in Irish set dances are either tops or sides. Scottish country dance[ edit ] Further information: Scottish country dance Scottish country dances cover a wide range of formations, including many square dances. These dances, which are standardized by the Royal Scottish Country Dance Society , [22] involve specific steps and formations that are performed in different sequences for different dances. [23] Continental Europe[ edit ] Many traditions have square dances. They are usually not called; rather, the sequence of figures is fixed and known by the dancers. Examples include the German Bekedorfer, French Carré de Campagne, Mie Katoen from the Low Countries, and Eastern European Jewish Sher or Sherele. Variations include double squares, with two couples on each side, like the Danish Sonderborger Doppelkadril or the Dutch Vleegerd. Some are composed of multiple figures, indicating descent from the high-society quadrille. Numbering of couples[ edit ] Quadrille variation involving five couples dancing at a Colonial Ball in the Albert Hall , Canberra September 2016 ( sepia ) The four couples arranged in a square are called a set, [24] and each couple is numbered. Couple numbering in a square dance set usually begins with the couple nearest the head of the hall (the side of the room containing the musicians and caller, or, in the pre-caller era, the royal presence or other hosts or important guests). This couple is the first or number one couple. If most figures are danced around the set, with one or more couples visiting the others in turn, the couples are likewise numbered around the set. In most surviving American square dance traditions, the couples are numbered counterclockwise: the second couple is to the first couple's right, the third couple is across from the first, and the fourth couple is to the left of the first. The first and third are head couples or heads (or, in older parlance, the first four); the second and fourth are side couples or sides (formerly side four or second four). If most of the figures are danced between facing couples across the set, as in the 19th century quadrille and dances derived from it, the couple opposite the first is the second couple. The first and second couples constitute the head or top couples (or the head and foot couples); the third and fourth couples are the side couples. In Irish set dances, the third couple (sometimes termed the first side couple) is to the left of the first top couple. The couples facing the first top and first side are the second top couple and the second side couple respectively. Callers and calls[ edit ] Traditional square dance calls at a dance in Concord, Massachusetts Square dance movements are known as calls, and some forms of the dance, such as traditional and modern western square dancing, use a caller to direct the dancers through different calls. In some forms of traditional square dancing, the caller may be one of the dancers or musicians, but in modern western square dancing, the caller is on stage giving full attention to directing the dancers. A square dance call may take a very short time or a very long time to execute. Most calls require between 4 and 32 counts , where a count is roughly one step. In traditional square dancing, the timing of a call is dictated by tradition; in some regional styles, particularly that of New England, the dance movements are closely fitted to the phrases of the music. In modern western square dancing, many calls have been given formally specified durations, based partly on direct observation of how long it takes an average dancer to execute them. Traditional and modern western square dance differ in the number of calls and their levels of standardization. Traditional square dance uses between ten and thirty calls, depending on the region and the individual caller. Many traditional square dance calls are similar or identical to contra dance calls, and new dance moves are explained by the caller. In modern western square dance, the participants learn and become proficient in a particular defined set of calls known as a program . The Mainstream program, which is the default level of achievement, consists of close to 70 basic and mainstream calls. [16] [17] Rather than learning a complete routine, modern western square dancers learn basic movements and calls but do not know in what order they will be called. Unlike traditional square dance, two modern western dances are rarely alike. Most modern western square dancers participate only in the programs they have fully learned. Callerlab, the callers' international association, sets all programs and governs the training of callers. [25] Traditional and modern western square dancing have a number of calls in common, but there are usually small differences in the way they are performed. For example, the Allemande Left is traditionally performed by grasping left hands with the other dancer, pulling away from each other slightly, and walking halfway around a central axis then stepping through. In modern western square dance, the grip is modified so that each dancer grips the forearm of the other, and there is no pulling (that is, each dancer supports his or her own weight). These modifications make it easier to enter and exit the movement and thus easier to incorporate it into a long sequence of calls. In many communities, including Scotland and Ireland, and also continental Europe, the dancers know the complete dance and there is no caller. Old-time fiddlers often accompany traditional square dances. Square dance music varies widely by type of dance. Traditional square dance is primarily danced to live music. Since the 19th century, much of the square dance repertoire has been derived from jigs and reels from Scotland and Ireland, sometimes in relatively unaltered form, sometimes as played in the old-time music tradition or as adapted by other cultures, such as that of Quebec. This sort of music is played on acoustic instruments, such as the fiddle , banjo , guitar , and double bass ; certain instruments, including the piano , accordion , concertina , and hammered dulcimer , are popular in specific regions. In some communities where square dancing has survived, the prevailing form of music has become popular songs from the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s, played on instruments such as saxophones , drums , and electric guitars . Tempos can vary from around 108 to more than 150 beats per minute, depending on the regional style. Modern western square dance is danced to a variety of music types, including pop , traditional and contemporary country music , songs from Broadway musicals , rock , Motown , techno , and hip-hop . The music is usually played from recordings, and the tempo is more uniform than in traditional square dancing, ranging from 120-128 beats per minute. At this speed, dancers take one step per beat of the music. Irish and Scottish dances are normally done to traditional tunes. English dances may be done to traditional tunes, though there is experimentation with many different musical styles, especially at cèilidhs. Clubs and attire[ edit ] American-style square dancers performing outdoors in Schleswig-Holstein , Germany in 2014 Square dance events can be run in different ways. In North America, traditional square dances are organized by bands, callers, or small groups of dancers. [26] Modern western square dances are arranged by square dance clubs . The clubs offer classes, socials, and dance evenings and arrange larger dances that are usually open to non-club members. In Britain, square dance clubs are affiliated with the British Association of American Square Dance Clubs, which also organizes the teaching of modern western square dance to Callerlab definitions. Most square dance events in Britain are run according to the Callerlab syllabus by a caller who is either a member of Callerlab or of the Square Dance Callers Club of Great Britain, and the level of dancing is indicated on the publicity material, as in "Mainstream" or "Mainstream with Pre-Announced Plus". Céilidh and barn dance events are also often advertised as being square dance events. Square dance attire varies by the type of dance and by region. Traditional square dance groups often have no particular dress code. [26] In the United States, larger modern western square dance events sometimes request a strict western-style dress code, which originated in the late 1950s and early 1960s and is known as traditional square dance attire , although it was not traditional before that time. Some clubs require a less strict dress code, known as proper, or no dress code, called casual. Although many modern western square dancers in Britain wear traditional square dance attire, events often have a relaxed dress code. Where traditional square dancing exists as a community social dance, sometimes in the form of a barn dance or a cèilidh, people often dress up, though their clothing is not square-dance-specific. In the United States, lines between the forms of square dancing have become blurred. Traditional-revival groups typically adopt very casual dress, and traditional-revival choreographers have begun to use basic movements that were invented for modern western square dance forms. A few modern western callers incorporate older dances from various traditions, such as New England or Appalachian, into their programs. Variations[ edit ] Square dance in Gjoa Haven , northern Canada While the standard formation for a square dance is four couples in a square, there are many variations on the theme. These include: Ninepins: a square with one extra person in the middle. Winter Solstice: a square with one extra couple in the middle. Hexitation: a square with two couples in each of the head positions. Twelve Reel: a square with three people on each side, normally a man with a woman on either side of him. Hexagon dancing: six couples arranged in a hexagon. There are three head couples and three side couples. This variation is most commonly done by advanced and challenge-level dancers. Bigon: a square with four people who each dances their own part and that of their opposite. This variation is almost exclusively done by challenge-level dancers due to its difficulty. Modern choreography also includes dances which morph from one form to another. There are contra dances and four-couple longways sets which turn into a square dance part of the way through the dance and then back to the original formation. Grid squares are dances where the squares are arranged in a grid, with sets carefully aligned across the room and up and down the room. The calls move dancers from one square to another in intricate patterns.
1920's, Harlem , New York City, U.S. [1] Evita and Michael at 2011 Catalina Swing Dance Festival Swing dance is a group of social dances that developed with the swing style of jazz music in the 1920s–1940s, with the origins of each dance predating the popular " swing era ". Hundreds of styles of swing dancing were developed; those that have survived beyond that era include Charleston , Balboa , Lindy Hop , and Collegiate Shag . [2] [3] Today, the best-known of these dances is the Lindy Hop,  which originated in Harlem in the early 1930s. [4] While the majority of swing dances began in African-American communities as vernacular African-American dances , some influenced swing-era dances, like Balboa, developed outside of these communities. "Swing dance" was not commonly used to identify a group of dances until the latter half of the 20th century. Historically, the term swing referred to the style of jazz music, which inspired the evolution of the dance. Jitterbug is any form of swing dance, though it is often used as a synonym for the six-count derivative of Lindy Hop called "East Coast Swing". [5] It was also common to use the word to identify a kind of dancer (i.e., a swing dancer).  A "jitterbug" might prefer to dance Lindy Hop, Shag, or any of the other swing dances.  The term was famously associated with swing era band leader Cab Calloway because, as he put it, "[The dancers] look like a bunch of jitterbugs out there on the floor due to their fast, often bouncy movements." [6] The term "swing dancing" is often extended to include other dances that do not have certain characteristics of traditional swing dances: West Coast Swing , Carolina Shag , East Coast Swing , Hand Dancing , Jive , Rock and Roll , Modern Jive , and other dances developed during the 1940s and later.  A strong tradition of social and competitive boogie woogie and Rock 'n' Roll in Europe add these dances to their local swing dance cultures. [7] Original forms dating from the 1920s and early 1930s[ edit ] Charleston (dance) is danced partnered or solo, often to faster music. It Charleston includes a number of positions, including side-by-side, hand-to-hand, and tandem.  In "jockey position", the closed position is opened out so that both partners may face forward, without breaking apart.  In side-by-side Charleston, partners open the closed position entirely, so that their only points of connection are at their touching hips and arm contact, wherein the leader's right hand and arm touch the follower's back and the follower's left hand and arm touch the leader's shoulder and arm.  Both partners then swing their free arms as they would in solo Charleston. In both jockey and side-by-side Charleston, the leader steps back onto their left foot, while the follower steps back onto their right. In tandem Charleston, one partner stands in front of the other (usually the follower, though the arrangement may vary), both face in the same direction to start, and both begin by stepping back onto the left foot.  The partner behind holds the front partner's hands, and their joined arms swing backwards and forwards, as in the basic step. Balboa , also known as "Bal", is an 8-count dance that is done in closed position . The earliest form of the dance (often called "Pure Balboa") evolved in the mostly conservative dance halls of southern California where space was limited and strict codes of conduct were enforced.  These dance halls usually prohibited the wild kicks of the Charleston and Lindy Hop.  Pure Balboa is characterized by an upright posture with partners standing chest to chest.  Step variations generally play with the rhythm or look and feel (style) from below the knee downwards and deal with changes in direction. Balboa is frequently danced to fast jazz (usually anything from 180 to 320 BPM ), though many like a slower (170-190 BPM) tempo. While most dancers differentiate between pure Balboa and Bal-Swing , both are considered to be a part of the dance. Bal-Swing evolved from Balboa when original Balboa dancers experimented with fancier variations of the dance which forced the chest to chest connection to be broken. In this form of Balboa a variety of spins, turns, dips, tricks, and even air steps are introduced. [8] Lindy Hop evolved in the early 1930s. [9] It is a dance of African American origin characterized by a high degree of physical vigor. [10] It is characterized by an 8-count basic, the "swingout", that transitions from open position through closed position and back. It has an emphasis on improvisation and the ability to include other steps in 8-count and 6-count rhythms. [11] The name "Lindy Hop" is often attributed to "Shorty" George Snowden during an interaction with a newspaper writer who asked him what kind of dance they were doing. Because Charles Lindbergh had just made his famous solo flight across the Atlantic Ocean, Shorty George is said to have replied, "the Lindy Hop." Whether it was Shorty George who coined the name is disputed by some writers, but, in any case, the name stuck. [12] The Savoy Ballroom in Harlem was the home of the Lindy Hop. As its popularity increased, professional troupes were formed. These troupes toured the United States and Europe performing versions of the Lindy Hop. [13] Collegiate Shag (or "Shag") is done primarily to uptempo swing and sometimes pre-swing jazz music (185-200+ BPM). It is believed that the dance originated in the Carolinas in the 1920s, [3] [14] later spreading across the United States during the 1930s. The shag is still danced today by swing dance enthusiasts worldwide. Shag is believed to have been the first and most popular swing dance of the original swing era [3] Forms dating from the late 1930s and early 1940s[ edit ] St. Louis shag (or "Shag") is a dance that evolved out of the Charleston . [15] As its name suggests, it is recognized as having started in St. Louis , Missouri. St. Louis Shag features a stationary 8-count basic that is most commonly composed of triple-step, kick, triple-step, kick. It is a very fast closed position dance that is usually done to stomp , jump , and boogie-woogie music. Big Apple is both a partner dance and a "called" circle dance that originated in the Afro-American community of the United States in the beginning of the 20th century.  The dance that eventually became known as the Big Apple is speculated to have been created in the early 1930s by African-American youth dancing at the Big Apple Club, which was at the former House of Peace Synagogue on Park Street in Columbia, South Carolina . [16] The synagogue was converted into a black juke joint called the "Big Apple Night Club". [16] [17] [18] Little Apple This dance was a partnered version of the Big Apple, which is also believed to have originated in the Carolinas of the Southern United States. [3] Derivatives of swing dance from the 1940s and 1950s[ edit ] East Coast Swing is a simpler 6-count variation that spawned from the six-count variations of the Lindy Hop.  It evolved with swing-band music of the 1940s and the work of the Arthur Murray dance studios in the 1940s. [19] It is also known as Six-count Swing, Triple-Step Swing, or Single-Step Swing.  East Coast Swing has very simple structure and footwork along with basic moves and styling. It is popular for its simple nature and is often danced to slow, medium, or fast tempo jazz , blues, or rock and roll.  Occasionally, Rockabilly, aka Rock-a-billy, is mistaken for East Coast Swing, but Rockabilly is more closely related to Western Swing. West Coast Swing was developed in the 1940s, as a stylistic variation on the Los Angeles style of the Lindy Hop. It is a slotted dance and is done to a wide variety of music including: blues , rock and roll , country western , pop , hip hop , smooth , cool jazz , R& B, and funk music. [20] [21] Western Swing has long been the name for jazz-influenced western music of the 1940s and, by extension, two-step, line dancing or swing dance done to such music. Contemporary 21st century Country Swing or dancing or "Country Western Swing Dancing"  (C/W Swing) has a distinct culture, with classes and instructional videos on YouTube and DVD teaching dips, lifts, aerials and flips. It adds variations from other country dances, swing styles, salsa and more. As the name suggests, it is most often danced to country and western music . Boogie-woogie developed originally in the 1940s, with the rise of boogie woogie music. It is popular today in Europe, and was considered by some to be the European counterpart to East Coast Swing, a 6-count dance standardized for the American ballroom industry. It is danced to rock music of various kinds, blues or boogie woogie music but usually not to jazz. As the dance has developed, it has also taken to 8-count variations and swing outs similar to Lindy Hop, while keeping the original boogie woogie footwork. Carolina Shag was danced along the strands between Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, and Wilmington, North Carolina, during the 1940s but, during the 1990s and later, has expanded to many other places. It is most often associated with beach music , which refers to songs that are rhythm-and-blues-based and, according to Bo Bryan , a noted shag historian and resident of Beaufort County, is a term that was coined at Carolina Beach , North Carolina. Imperial Swing is a cross between East Coast and West Coast Swing. Imperial Swing uses the triple step footwork from East Coast Swing, but is a slotted dance with smooth (not bouncy) foot styling from West Coast Swing. Slotted dancing was introduced to Imperial Swing in the  late 1970s and has completely replaced the original dancing in the round. Imperial Swing shares the same core moves with West Coast Swing: the starter (or basic) step, the crossover or side pass, the sugar push (or patty-cake) and the whip. [22] It started at the Club Imperial in St Louis. George Edick, who owned the club, let teenagers dance on the lower level and the swing dancers of the time taught them what was learned from their trips to the east coast. As people traveled around, they added parts of west coast, bop and Carolina shag to complement the dance and make it distinctive. "The Imperial" has elements of "East Coast", "West Coast", "Carolina Shag" and "Bop". [23] Jive is a dance of International Style Ballroom dancing. It is a very upbeat dance in which the performers look to be hopping off the ground. It initially was based on Eastern swing taken to England by American Troops in World War II and evolved before becoming the now standardized form of today. Skip Jive is a British variant of the Jive, popular in the 1950s and 1960s, danced to trad jazz . Modern Jive (also known as LeRoc and Ceroc ©) developed in the 1980s, reputedly from a French form of Jive.  Modern Jive is not technically of the Jive family, which typically use a 6-count pattern of various combinations of walking and triple steps (Ballroom Jive - back/replace triple-triple; Swing Jive - triple-triple back/replace), etc.  It is pared down to a simple box step and concentrates on the simpler forms of couple dance styling, gauged to provide a social atmosphere rather than technical aptitude. There are debates about whether it is a form of swing dancing due to lack of syncopations, rhythmic footwork variations, a static partner dynamic, and lack of swinging music, amongst the swing community at large, but they do consider themselves a style of swing. Rock and Roll - Developing in the 1950s in response to rock and roll music , rock-and-roll is very popular in Australia and danced socially as well as competitively and in performances. The style has a long association with Lindy Hop in that country, as many of the earliest Lindy Hoppers in the early 1990s moved to Lindy Hop from a rock-and-roll tradition. There are ongoing debates about whether rock-and-roll constitutes swing dancing, particularly in reference to the music to which it is danced: there is some debate as to whether or not it swings . Acrobatic Rock'n'Roll – Popular in Europe, acrobatic rock'n'roll is popularly associated with Russian gymnasts who took up the dance, though it is popular throughout Europe today. It is a performance dance and sport rather than a social dance, though there are people who remove the acrobatic stunts to dance it on a social level. Washington Hand Dancing originated around Washington, DC in the mid-1950s,  and a new generation of dancers started innovating and dancing to Motown music. From its very beginning, DC Hand-dance was referred to and called “DC Hand-Dance/Hand-Dancing”, “DC Swing”, “DC Style” (swing) and “fast dance” (meaning DC Hand-Dance).  This is the first time a version of “swing” dance was termed “hand-dance/hand-dancing”.  DC Hand-Dance is characterized by very smooth footwork and movements, and close-in and intricate hand-turns, danced to a 6-beat, 6-count dance rhythm.  The more modern footwork consists of smooth and continuous floor contact, sliding and gliding-type steps versus hopping and jumping-type steps of the older style which stylistically still held elements of its Jitterbug/Lindy Hop roots, and there are no aerials. Push and Whip are Texas forms of swing dance developed in the 1940s and 1950s.  They are slotted swing dances, danced to a wide variety of music including blues, pop, jazz, and rock and roll.  Similar to West Coast Swing, they emphasize the closed position, double resistance/rock step, and lead-follow and also incorporate intricate arm work.  Slow Whip is a variation on Whip/Push that is danced to slow blues music, typically 60 BPM or slower. Swing dancing today[ edit ] Swing dancing was most popular in the 1930s and 1940s, but it still continues today. Dance moves have evolved with the music. Swing dancing styles are the foundation of many other dance styles including disco, country line dancing, and hip hop.  Swing dancing clubs and contests are still held around the world. [20] The American Bop Association (ABA) is a non-profit corporation of 34 member swing dance clubs who are dedicated to the preservation and promotion of the broad range of dance and music styles more commonly known as bop, all forms of swing, jitterbug, and shag. [24] San Francisco Sunday Streets: Valencia Levels[ edit ] In West Coast Swing the competitions are divided into sections by level of experience. The levels are Newcomer, Novice, Intermediate, Advanced and All-Star. There is no official system in the United States to ensure that couples dance at the appropriate level of experience. The World Swing Dance Council holds a Registry of all points attained at different levels of competition. [25] There is no points system for the majority of Lindy Hop competitions. [26] Judging criteria[ edit ] Swing dancing falls under the American Rhythm category. There are several different categories at competitions depending on what type of dance you do. [27] Judging for competition is based on the three "T's" as well as showmanship. [28] Heats[ edit ] Most competition dance floors can only hold about 12 couples dancing at a time. If the number of participants is larger than what the floor can hold, the competition will hold qualifying rounds. Once they get to 24 couples there will then be the quarterfinal round (2 separate rounds of about 12 each), then the semifinal (1 round of about 12), and finally the final round (1 round, usually 6 or 7 couples). [27]
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dance of Cuban origin cha- cha For the American song & line dance, see Cha-Cha Slide . Cha-cha-cha Cuba The cha-cha-cha (also called cha-cha), is a dance of Cuban origin. [1] [2] It is danced to the music of the same name introduced by the Cuban composer and violinist Enrique Jorrin in the early 1950s. This rhythm was developed from the danzón-mambo . The name of the dance is an onomatopoeia derived from the shuffling sound of the dancers' feet when they dance two consecutive quick steps that characterize the dance. [3] In the early 1950s, Enrique Jorrín worked as a violinist and composer with the charanga group Orquesta América . The group performed at dance halls in Havana where they played danzón , danzonete, and danzon-mambo for dance-oriented crowds. Jorrín noticed that many of the dancers at these gigs had difficulty with the syncopated rhythms of the danzón-mambo. To make his music more appealing to dancers, Jorrín began composing songs where the melody was marked strongly on the first downbeat and the rhythm was less syncopated . [4] When Orquesta América performed these new compositions at the Silver Star Club in Havana, it was noticed that the dancers had improvised a triple step in their footwork producing the sound "cha-cha-cha". Thus, the new style came to be known as "cha-cha-chá" and became associated with a dance where dancers perform a triple step. [5] The basic footwork pattern of cha-cha-cha (one, two, three, cha-cha-one, two, three) is also found in several Afro-Cuban dances from the Santería religion. For example, one of the steps used in the dance practiced by the Orisha Ogun religious  features an identical pattern of footwork. These Afro-Cuban dances predate the development of cha-cha-cha and were known by many Cubans in the 1950s, especially those of African origin. [6] Thus, the footwork of the cha-cha-cha was likely inspired by these Afro-Cuban dances. [7] In 1953, Orquesta América released two of Jorrin's compositions, " La Engañadora " and "Silver Star", on the Cuban record label Panart . These were the first cha-cha-cha compositions ever recorded. They immediately became hits in Havana, and other Cuban charanga orchestras quickly imitated this new style. Soon, there was a cha-cha-cha craze in Havana's dance halls, popularizing both the music and the associated dance. This craze soon spread to Mexico City , and by 1955, the music and dance of the cha-cha-cha had become popular in Latin America, the United States, and Western Europe, following in the footsteps of the mambo , which had been a worldwide craze a few years earlier. [8] Description[ edit ] Cha-cha-cha is danced to authentic Cuban music , although in ballroom competitions it is often danced to Latin pop or Latin rock . The music for the international ballroom cha-cha-cha is energetic and with a steady beat. The music may involve complex polyrhythms . A cha-cha-cha dance video Styles of cha-cha-cha dance may differ in the place of the chasse in the rhythmical structure. [9] The original Cuban and the ballroom cha-cha-cha count is "one, two, three, cha-cha", or "one, two, three, four-and." [10] An incorrect "street version" comes about because many social dancers count "one, two, cha-cha-cha" and thus shift the timing of the dance by a full beat of music.  Note that the dance known as Salsa is the result of a similar timing shift of Mambo. Pattern[ edit ] In the International School of Ballroom Dance , the basic pattern involves the lead taking a checked forward step with the left foot, retaining some weight on the right foot. The knee of the right leg must stay bent and close to the back of the left knee, the left leg having straightened just prior to receiving part weight. This step is taken on the second beat of the bar. Full weight is returned to the right leg on the second step (beat three). The fourth beat is split in two so the count of the next three steps is 4-and-1. These three steps constitute the cha-cha chasse. A step to the side is taken with the left foot, the right foot is half closed towards the left foot (typically leaving both feet under the hips or perhaps closed together), and finally there is a last step to the left with the left foot. The length of the steps in the chasse depends very much on the effect the dancer is attempting to make. [10] The partner takes a step back on the right foot, the knee being straightened as full weight is taken. The other leg is allowed to remain straight. It is possible it will shoot slightly but no deliberate flexing of the free leg is attempted. This is quite different from technique associated with salsa , for instance. On the next beat (beat three) weight is returned to the left leg. Then a chasse is danced RLR. Each partner is now in a position to dance the bar their partner just danced. Hence the fundamental construction of cha-cha-cha extends over two bars. The checked first step is a later development in the "international cha-cha-cha" style. Because of the action used during the forward step (the one taking only part weight) the basic pattern turns left, whereas in earlier times cha-cha-cha was danced without rotation of the alignment. Hip actions are allowed to occur at the end of every step. For steps taking a single beat the first half of the beat constitutes the foot movement and the second half is taken up by the hip movement. The hip sway eliminates any increase in height as the feet are brought towards each other. In general, steps in all directions should be taken first with the ball of the foot in contact with the floor, and then with the heel lowering when the weight is fully transferred; however, some steps require that the heel remain lifted from the floor. When weight is released from a foot, the heel should release from the floor first, allowing the toe to maintain contact with the floor. In the American School of Ballroom Dance, the basic step spans two musical measures (frequently counted "one, two, three, four-and, five, six, seven, eight-and" with "five" marking the beginning of the second measure.  The leader steps sideways to the left on count 1, back onto the right foot on count 2, forward with the left foot on count 3, then a cha-cha consisting of a step sideways to the right on count 4 followed by a step in place on the left foot on "and" between count four and count 5 to permit another step sideways to the right on count 5 (or count 1 of the second measure), a step forward with the left foot on count 6, a step backward with the right foot on count 7, and a cha-cha to the left on the "eight-and" to set up another step sideways to the left to begin the next repetition of the pattern. Hip movement[ edit ] A couple dancing cha-cha-cha. The woman moves her hips while holding the torso relatively still. In traditional American Rhythm style, Latin hip movement is achieved through the alternate bending and straightening action of the knees, though in modern competitive dancing, the technique is virtually identical to the "international Latin" style. In the international Latin style, the weighted leg is almost always straight. The free leg will bend, allowing the hips to naturally settle into the direction of the weighted leg. As a step is taken, a free leg will straighten the instant before it receives weight. It should then remain straight until it is completely free of weight again. International Latin style cha-cha-cha[ edit ] Cha-cha-cha is one of the five dances of the "Latin American" program of international ballroom competitions. As described above, the basis of the modern dance was laid down in the 1950s by Pierre and Lavelle [11] and developed in the 1960s by Walter Laird and other top competitors of the time. The basic steps taught to learners today are based on these accounts. In general, steps are kept compact and the dance is danced generally without any rise and fall ; this is the modern ballroom technique of cha-cha-cha (and other Latin dances).
The Waltz , by Camille Claudel (cast in 1905) In the 19th and early 20th century, numerous different waltz forms existed, including versions performed in 34, 38 or 68 (sauteuse), and 54 time (54 waltz, half and half). In the 1910s, a form called the Hesitation Waltz was introduced by Vernon and Irene Castle . [19] It incorporated "hesitations" and was danced to fast music. A hesitation is basically a halt on the standing foot during the full waltz bar, with the moving foot suspended in the air or slowly dragged. Similar figures ( Hesitation Change , Drag Hesitation , and Cross Hesitation ) are incorporated in the International Standard Waltz Syllabus. The Country Western Waltz is mostly progressive, moving counter clock wise around the dance floor. Both the posture and frame are relaxed, with posture bordering on a slouch. The exaggerated hand and arm gestures of some ballroom styles are not part of this style. Couples may frequently dance in the promenade position , depending on local preferences. Within Country Western waltz, there is the Spanish Waltz and the more modern (for the late 1930s- early 1950s) Pursuit Waltz. At one time it was considered ill treatment for a man to make the woman walk backwards in some locations. [20] In California, the waltz was banned by Mission priests until 1834 because of the "closed" dance position. [21] Thereafter a Spanish Waltz was danced. This Spanish Waltz was a combination of dancing around the room in closed position, and a "formation" dance of two couples facing each other and performing a sequence of steps. [21] "Valse a Trois Temps" was the "earliest" waltz step, and the Rye Waltz was preferred as a couple dance. [22] In contemporary ballroom dance , the fast versions of the waltz are called Viennese waltz as opposed to the Slow waltz . [23] In traditional Irish music , the waltz was taught by travelling dancing masters to those who could afford their lessons during the 19th century. By the end of that century, the dance spread to the middle and lower classes of Irish society and traditional triple-tune tunes and songs were altered to fit the waltz rhythm. During the 20th century, the waltz found a distinctively Irish playing style in the hands of Céilidh musicians at dances . [24] [25] International Standard Waltz has only closed figures; that is, the couple never breaks the embrace. The American Style Waltz , part of the American Smooth ballroom dance syllabus, in contrast to the International Standard Waltz, involves breaking contact almost entirely in some figures. For example, the Syncopated Side-by-Side with Spin includes a free spin for both partners. Open rolls are another good example of an open dance figure , in which the follower alternates between the lead's left and right sides, with the lead's left or right arm (alone) providing the lead. Waltzes were the staple of many American musicals and films, including "Waltz in Swing Time" sung by Fred Astaire .[ citation needed ] The Scandinavian Waltz, performed as a part of Scandinavian folk dance , can be fast or slow, but the dancers are always rotating.[ citation needed ] The Peruvian Waltz is called and recognised in Peru as vals criollo.[ citation needed ] The Mexican Waltz (vals mexicano) follows the same basic rhythmic pattern as the standard waltz, but the melodies reflect a strong Spanish influence. Mexico's Juventino Rosas wrote " Sobre las Olas " or "Over the Waves”. The Cajun Waltz is danced progressively around the floor, and is characterised by the subtle swaying of the hips and step very close to ordinary walking. It is danced entirely in the closed position.[ citation needed ] The Cuban (or Tropical) Waltz follows the pattern of the standard waltz throughout the song.[ citation needed ] The Venezuelan waltz provided a basis for distinctive regional musical composition.[ citation needed ] The Contra Waltz (Freeform Waltz), included in most contra dance evenings, uses both open and closed positions, and incorporates moves from other dances such as swing , modern jive and salsa . Basically the dancers progress around the dance floor with a waltz step, but with no constraints on what moves they can use.[ citation needed ] The Valse Musette , a form of waltz popular in France, started in the late 19th century.[ citation needed ] The cross-step waltz (French Valse Boston) developed in France in the early 20th century and is popular in social waltz groups today.[ citation needed ] In folk dance from the Alsace region, waltzes in odd metres such as 54, 84 and 114 are found. In modern bal folk , waltzes in even higher metres are played and danced. Estonian folk dance Labajalavalss (flat of the foot waltz) performed in 34 time. [26] Sama'i (also known as usul semai) is a vocal piece of Ottoman Turkish music composed in 6/8 metres. This form and metre (usul in Turkish) is often confused with the completely different Saz Semaisi, an instrumental form consisting of three to four sections, in 10/8 metre, or usul aksak semai (broken semai in Turkish). Semai is one of the most important forms in Ottoman Turkish Sufi music. [27] [28] The Tsamikos ( Greek : Τσάμικος, Tsamikos) or Kleftikos ( Greek : Κλέφτικος) is a popular traditional folk dance of Greece , done to music of 34 metre. [29]
Samba rock , a subgenre of samba Samba!, a 1962 album by Edmundo Ros Samba (album) , a 2005 album by Twins "Samba" (song) , a 2011 song by Ricky Martin from the album Música + Alma + Sexo Samba, Jammu and Kashmir , a town in Jammu and Kashmir, India Samba district , a district in Jammu and Kashmir, India Samba, Iran , a village in South Khorasan Province, Iran Samba, Luanda , a municipality in Luanda Province, Angola Samba Department including the town Samba, Burkina Faso
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Several music styles of Cuban origin This article is about the usage of the term rumba in music. For other uses, see Rumba (disambiguation) . Not to be confused with Roomba . The term rumba may refer to a variety of unrelated music styles . Originally, "rumba" was used as a synonym for "party" in northern Cuba , and by the late 19th century it was used to denote the complex of secular music styles known as Cuban rumba . [1] [2] Since the early 20th century the term has been used in different countries to refer to distinct styles of music and dance, most of which are only tangentially related to the original Cuban rumba, if at all. The vague etymological origin of the term rumba , as well as its interchangeable use with guaracha in settings such as bufo theatre , [3] is largely responsible for such worldwide polysemy of the term. In addition, "rumba" was the primary marketing term for Cuban music in North America, as well as West and Central Africa, during much of the 20th century, before the rise of mambo , pachanga and salsa . "Rumba" entered the English lexicon in the early 20th century, at least as early as 1919, and by 1935 it was used a verb to denote the ballroom dance . [4] In this sense, the anglicised spelling "rhumba" became prevalent and is now recommended to distinguish it from traditional Cuban rumba. [5] Also in the first third of the 20th century, "rumba" entered the Spanish flamenco world as a fast-paced palo (style) inspired in the Cuban guaracha, and which gave rise to other forms of urban music now known as "rumba". Throughout Latin America, "rumba" acquired different connotations, mostly referring to Cubanized, danceable, local styles, such as Colombian rumba criolla (creole rumba). At the same time, "rumba" began to be used a catch-all term for Afro-Cuban music in most African countries, later giving rise to re-Africanized Cuban-based styles such as Congolese rumba . [6] Main article: Cuban rumba During the second half of the 19th century, several secular dance-oriented music styles were developed by Afro-Cuban workers in the poor neighbourhoods of Havana and Matanzas . [7] These syncretic styles would later be referred to as "rumba", a word that also meant "party". Traditionally, the three main styles of rumba are yambú , columbia and guaguancó , each of which has a characteristic dance, rhythm and singing. Although still a purely folkloric genre, numerous innovations have been introduced in rumba since the mid 20th century, including new styles such as batá-rumba and guarapachangueo . [7] In North America[ edit ] Main articles: Rhumba and Rumberas film In the US, the term " rhumba " (anglicised version of rumba) began to be used during the 1920s to refer to ballroom music with Afro-Cuban music themes, particularly in the context of big band music . [5] This music was mostly inspired by son cubano , while being rhythmically and instrumentally unrelated to Cuban rumba. [8] By 1935, with the release of " The Peanut Vendor " by Don Azpiazú and the popularity of Xavier Cugat and other Latin artists, the genre had become highly successful and well-defined. The rhumba dance that developed on the East Coast of the United States was based on the bolero - son . [9] The first rumba competition took place in the Savoy Ballroom in 1930. [10] Nowadays, two different styles of ballroom rumba coexist: American style and International style. From 1935 to the 1950s, the Mexican and American film industry expanded the use of the term rumba as rumbera films became popular. [11] In this context, rumberas were Cuban and Mexican divas, singers and actresses who sang boleros and canciones , but rarely rumbas. Notable rumberas include Rita Montaner , Rosa Carmina , María Antonieta Pons and Ninón Sevilla . [12] In the 1970s, with the emergence of salsa as a popular music and dance genre in the US, rhythmic elements of Cuban rumba (particularly guaguancó ) became prevalent alongside the son . [13] Like salsa , rhumba would then be danced to salsa ensembles instead of big bands. By the end of the 20th century, rhumba was also danced to pop music and jazz bands as seen in TV shows like Dancing with the Stars . [9] Main articles: Rumba flamenca , Catalan rumba , and Galician rumba In Spain, the term rumba was introduced in the early 20th century as rumba flamenca , one of the palos (styles) of flamenco . Particularly, it is considered one of the cantes de ida y vuelta , since flamenco itself might have had an influence on Cuban rumba, particularly on its vocal style. However, musicologists agree that rumba flamenca does not truly derive from Cuban rumba, but from guaracha , a fast-paced music style from Havana . [14] [15] Apart from rumba flamenca, other syncretic styles of Afro-Cuban origin have been named "rumba" throughout the Iberian peninsula, outside of the context of flamenco (where the term cantes de ida y vuelta is mostly restricted), such as the Galician rumba . In the late 1950s, popular artists such as Peret (El Rey de la Rumba) and El Pescaílla developed an uptempo style that combined elements from rumba flamenca, Spanish gypsy music and pop. This became known as Catalan rumba (rumba catalana). [16] In the 1980s, the style gained international popularity thanks to French ensemble Gipsy Kings . In the 1990s, the term “tecno-rumba” was used to describe the music of Camela , and later Azúcar Moreno . [17] Since the early 2000s, the term rumba has been used in Spain to refer to derivatives of Catalan rumba with hip hop and rock elements, as recorded by Estopa , Huecco and Melendi . [18] In Colombia[ edit ] In the late 1930s and early 1940s, a fusion of bambuco and Afro-Cuban music was developed in Colombia by artists such as Emilio Sierra, Milciades Garavito, and Diógenes Chaves Pinzón, under the name rumba criolla (creole rumba). [19] Rumba criolla is classified into different regional styles such as rumba antioqueña and rumba tolimense. [20] Main articles: Congolese rumba and Soukous In the 1930s and 1940s, Afro-Cuban son groups such as Septeto Habanero , Trio Matamoros and Los Guaracheros de Oriente were played over Radio Congo Belge in Léopoldville ( Kinshasa ), gaining widespread popularity in the country during the following decades. [21] [22] Their recordings were also made available to the public as part of the G.V. Series of 10" singles released by His Master's Voice throughout Africa. Once local bands tried to emulate the sound of Cuban son (incorrectly referred to as "rumba" in Africa, despite being unrelated to Cuban rumba ), their music became known as Congolese rumba or rumba Lingala. By the late 1960s, Congolese rumba was an established genre in most of Central Africa, and it would also impact the music of West and East Africa under Muziki wa dansi . Franco 's OK Jazz and Le Grand Kallé 's African Jazz were amongst the most successful Congolese rumba ensembles of the 20th century. A faster subgenre known as soukous (from the French word secouer, "to shake") was developed in the late 1960s by bands such as African Fiesta and is often used as a synonym of the former. [21] [23] [24] ^ Alén Rodríguez, Olavo (2010). " A History of the Congas ". AfroCubaWeb. Retrieved November 6, 2015. ^ Peñalosa, David (2011). Rumba Quinto. Bembe Books. p. 183.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ballroom dance This article is about the dance. For the album by Kenny Barron, see Quickstep (album) . For the cycling team, see Quick Step . Quickstep "Quick Step" dance rhythm figure. [1] The quickstep is a light-hearted dance of the standard ballroom dances . The movement of the dance is fast and powerfully flowing and sprinkled with syncopations . The upbeat melodies that quickstep is danced to make it suitable for both formal and informal events. Its origins are in combination of slow foxtrot combined with the Charleston , a dance which was one of the precursors to what today is called swing dancing . History[ edit ] The quickstep evolved in the 1920s from a combination of the foxtrot , Charleston , shag , peabody , and one-step . The dance is English in origin and was standardized in 1927. While it evolved from the foxtrot, the quickstep now is quite separate. Unlike the modern foxtrot, the leader often closes his feet, and syncopated steps are regular occurrences (as was the case in early foxtrot). Three characteristic dance figures of the quickstep are the chassés , where the feet are brought together, the quarter turns , and the lock step . [2] p126 This dance gradually evolved into a very dynamic one with much movement on the dance floor, with many advanced patterns including hops, runs, quick steps with much momentum, and rotation. The tempo of quickstep dance is rather brisk, as it was developed to ragtime era jazz music, which is fast-paced when compared to other dance music. By the end of the 20th century the complexity of quickstep as done by advanced dancers had increased, with the extensive use of syncopated steps with eighth note durations. While in older times quickstep patterns were counted with "quick" (one beat) and "slow" (two beats) steps, many advanced patterns today are cued with split beats, such as "quick-and-quick-and-quick, quick, slow", with there being further steps on the 'and's. Style[ edit ] The quickstep is elegant like the foxtrot and should be smooth and glamorous. The dancers should appear to be very light on their feet. It is very energetic and form-intensive.[ citation needed ] The quickstep is danced to 4/4 music of 48 to 52 measures per minute. [3] Syllabus[ edit ] The two International Style syllabi of ISTD and IDTA for quickstep differ very little. The American Style dance competition program does not include quickstep, but a limited version of the dance is taught and danced socially in some American dance venues.
Year 1914 The foxtrot is a smooth, progressive dance characterized by long, continuous flowing movements across the dance floor. It is danced to big band (usually vocal) music. The dance is similar in its look to waltz , although the rhythm is in a 44 time signature instead of 34. Developed in the 1910s, the foxtrot reached its height of popularity in the 1930s and remains practiced today. History[ edit ] Dancesport version of foxtrot The dance was premiered in 1914, quickly catching the eye of the husband and wife duo Vernon and Irene Castle , who gave the dance its signature grace and style.  The origin of the name of the dance is unclear, although one theory is that it took its name from its popularizer, the vaudevillian Harry Fox . [1] Two sources, Vernon Castle and dance teacher Betty Lee, credit African American dancers as the source of the foxtrot.  Castle saw the dance, which "had been danced by negroes, to his personal knowledge, for fifteen years, [at] a certain exclusive colored club". [2] W. C. Handy ("Father of the Blues") notes in his autobiography that his " The Memphis Blues " was the inspiration for the foxtrot.  During breaks from the fast-paced Castle Walk and One-step , Vernon and Irene Castle's music director, James Reese Europe , would slowly play "The Memphis Blues".  The Castles were intrigued by the rhythm, and Jim asked why they didn't create a slow dance to go with it.  The Castles introduced what they then called the "Bunny Hug" in a magazine article.  Shortly after, they went abroad and, in mid-ocean, sent a wireless to the magazine to change the name of the dance from "Bunny Hug" to "Foxtrot." [3] It was subsequently standardized by Arthur Murray , in whose version it began to imitate the positions of tango . At its inception, the foxtrot was originally danced to ragtime .  From the late 1910s through the 1940s, the foxtrot was the most popular fast dance, and the vast majority of records issued during these years were foxtrots.  The waltz and tango, while popular, never overtook it.  Even the popularity of the Lindy hop in the 1940s did not affect the foxtrot's popularity, since it could be danced to the same records used to accompany the Lindy hop. When rock and roll first emerged in the early 1950s, record companies were uncertain as to what style of dance would be most applicable to the music.  Notably, Decca Records initially labeled its rock and roll releases as "foxtrots", most notably " Rock Around the Clock " by Bill Haley and His Comets .  Since that recording, by some estimates, went on to sell more than 25 million copies, "Rock Around the Clock" could be considered the biggest-selling "foxtrot" of all time. [4] Today, the dance is customarily accompanied by the same big band music to which swing is also danced. Over time, the foxtrot split into slow and quick versions, referred to as "foxtrot" and " quickstep " respectively.  In the slow category, further distinctions exist between the International or English style of the foxtrot, and the American continuity style, both built around a slow-quick-quick rhythm at the slowest tempo, and the social American style using a slow-slow-quick-quick rhythm at a somewhat faster pace.  In the context of International Standard category of ballroom dances, for some time the foxtrot was called "Slow Foxtrot", or "Slowfox". These names are still in use, to distinguish from other types of foxtrots. Styles[ edit ] Three distinct styles of slow foxtrot are in common use among ballroom dancers today: the American Social Style, the American Continuity Style, and the International Style. All three are partner dances in which the dancers progress around the dance floor in a counter-clockwise direction and are danced to much the same music. However, they differ significantly in technique, positions, and figures. American Social Foxtrot[ edit ] The American Social Style [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] was, and to some extent still is, widely employed in the United States as a social and party dance. It is particularly well suited to dancing in a crowded room, by partners who may or may not know each other well, and who may or may not have had much formal training in dance. Its defining feature is that the dancers close their feet at the end of almost every figure, as opposed to passing their feet as in the other two styles. As a result, the dancers progress fairly slowly around the room, and some figures can even be danced in place. Furthermore, almost every figure begins in much the same position, with the two partners facing each other squarely in the closed position and the man starting on his left foot. Since each figure leads so easily and consistently in the next, it is fairly easy for the leader to string multiple figures together on the fly in an ever-changing sequence. Body contact is unnecessary and not generally expected; all figures can be led through the frame formed by the arms. Hence, the potential social awkwardness of body contact between partners who do not know each other well is avoided. As American Social Style is the only style allowed in bronze (beginner) level American Style dance competition, this style is sometimes also known as "American Bronze Foxtrot". The American Social style uses both six-count and eight-count figures. The rhythmic alteration between the two is one of the few potential difficulties in the dance. Syncopation is generally avoided. The six-count figures extend across one and a half measures of music, and utilize the rhythm slow (two counts), slow (two counts), quick (one count), quick (one count). Examples include: the basic movement forward and back, the alternating quarter turns (zig-zag), the rock turns right and left, the promenade, the promenade twist (12 counts), the promenade pivot (12 counts), and the sway step. Social dancers generally use the alternating quarter turns to progress in a zig-zag pattern around the room, alternating for variety with the promenade . Rock turns are used for changes of direction in corners and to avoid collisions. Both the rock turns and balance step can be danced entirely in place, if necessitated by crowded conditions. Many of these figures can be further embellished by underarm turns. The eight-count figures extend across two measures of music and utilize the rhythm slow (two counts), quick (one count), quick (one count); slow (two counts), quick (one count), quick (one count). Most of them can be further decomposed into two four-count figures, although this would break the convention that every figure begins in closed position with the man stepping on his left foot. Examples include: the forward and reverse box, the left and right box turns, the closed twinkle with promenade close ending, the fallaway twinkles (16 counts), the promenade twinkles (16 counts), and the serpentine (progressive twinkles) with closed footwork. A few, such as the grapevine, utilize a faster rhythm consisting of four quicks. Most of these eight-count figures resemble corresponding figures in the waltz, with the rhythm modified by extending the first step of each figure to occupy two counts. Again, many of these figures can be further embellished by underarm turns. The only common syncopated figure is the chassé . It is a four-count figure with the rhythm slow (two counts) quick-and-quick (two counts), that may be inserted between a closed twinkle and its promenade close ending. American Continuity Style[ edit ] The American Continuity Style [10] [11] [12] [13] is widely employed in the United States as a competitive dance and as a base for formation dance and the performing arts. It is the style generally seen in American musical theater productions and in film. It differs from the social style in that the dancers pass their feet at the end of each figure, rather than closing them. Consequently, dancers progress much more rapidly around the room, in a smooth, continuous manner that gives the style its name. It differs from the International Style in that body contact is optional. This permits the dance partners to assume a much wider variety of positions and, therefore, to execute many types of figures that are not possible in the International Style. As American Continuity Style is expected in Silver Level American Style dance competitions and above, this style is sometimes also known as "American Silver Foxtrot". Transitions from one dance position to another are an important aspect of the American style. Commonly employed dance positions include normal (closed) position, in which the dancers face each other squarely with the man's right hand around the woman's back; promenade position, in which the partners open slightly in a vee; open position (a two-hand hold with the arms extending forward sideways); and shadow position (in which both partners face the same direction, rather than each other). Partners may even separate completely for short periods of time. "Lines", in which the partners form and hold a special shape for a short period of time, also play an important role. Examples include the oversway, the chair, the check. In the American Continuity Style, most figures are based upon four-count units with the rhythm slow (two counts), quick (one count), quick (one count) repeating in each measure. A basic dance sequence progressing around the room in a straight line might consist of an open left box turn (eight counts), an open twinkle (four counts), an open right turn (four counts), an open impetus (a/k/a hairpin) (four counts), and a continuity ending (four counts), returning to the start of the sequence. Other figures based upon the same rhythm include the serpentine (a/k/a progressive twinkles) with open footwork; the curved running steps; the outside swivel; the pivot from promenade; and the natural fallaway. Many of these figures may be executed in a variety of positions: for instance, the serpentine may be executed in closed position, open position, or shadow position, with the man facing either forwards or backwards. Many of these figures may be further embellished by underarm turns, especially when changing from one dance position to another. Variations upon this basic rhythm may employ four quick steps (quick, quick, quick, quick) as in the grapevine and the second measure of the weave, or syncopation (slow, quick-and-quick quick) as in the chassé. Many Continuity-Style Foxtrot figures are similar to those of American Continuity Style Waltz , with the rhythm modified by extending the first step of each figure to occupy two counts. Some, like the open twinkles, are direct developments of the corresponding Social Foxtrot figures in which the footwork has been modified by passing the feet at the end of the figure instead of closing the feet; others are entirely different. International Style[ edit ] The International (British) Style [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] is widely employed in Europe and Great Britain as a social and competitive dance. Its defining characteristic is that partners must maintain body contact at all times. Consequently, the variety of possible figures and positions is much more limited than in the American style. Dancers concentrate on creating an image of a smooth, gliding motion around the dance floor. The use of body contact makes it possible to execute very tight turns, which is further enhanced by the extensive use of heel turns. This use of heel turns, and the effort required to produce the desired gliding motion, give International Style Foxtrot a reputation as being perhaps the most difficult of all ballroom dances to execute well. Most figures are based upon four-count units with the rhythm slow (two counts), quick (one count), quick (one count), repeating in each measure. A basic dance sequence progressing around the room might employ a feather step (four counts), reverse turn with feather finish (eight counts), three step (four counts), natural turn (four counts) with impetus (four count) and feather finish (four count), connecting again to a reverse turn. However, rhythmic variation is used to make up for the loss of variety in figures and positions: thus, for example, the weave uses four quick steps in a single measure, while the change of direction uses a two-measure sequence of four slow steps.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dance style This article is about the ballroom dance style. For other dances that go by the name, see Jive . Austrian Open Championships Vienna, 2012 WDSF World Dancesport Championships Latin,  16–18 November 2012 The jive is a dance style that originated in the United States from African Americans in the early 1930s. The name of the dance comes from the name of a form of African-American vernacular slang , popularized in the 1930s by the publication of a dictionary by Cab Calloway , the famous jazz bandleader and singer. [1] In competition ballroom dancing , the jive is often grouped with the Latin-inspired ballroom dances, though its roots are based on swing dancing and not Latin dancing. History[ edit ] Jiving in a British dance hall, 1945 To the players of swing music in the 1930s and 1940s, "jive" was an expression denoting glib or foolish talk. [2] American soldiers brought Lindy Hop / jitterbug to Europe around 1940, where this dance swiftly found a following among the young. In the United States, "swing" became the most common word for the dance, and the term "jive" was adopted in the UK. Variations in technique led to styles such as boogie-woogie and swing boogie, with "jive" gradually emerging as the generic term in the UK. [3]
Toggle the table of contents Pasodoble (Redirected from Paso doble ) Music genre and dance This article is about the Spanish dance and music genre. For the German NDW band, see Paso Doble (band) . For the Romanian film, see Pas în doi . For the song by Ringo Starr, "Pasodobles", see Liverpool 8 . This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . Learn how and when to remove this template message ) This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references . (January 2021) ( You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish. (March 2018) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Spanish article. Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 5,269 articles in the main category , and specifying|topic= will aid in categorization. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:Pasodoble]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|es|Pasodoble}} to the talk page . For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation . ( Pasodoble on ice: Luca Lanotte & Anna Cappellini Poster for a bull fight in Barcelona Pasodoble ( Spanish : double step) is a fast-paced Spanish military march used by infantry troops. Its speed allowed troops to give 120 steps per minute (double the average of a regular unit, hence its name). This military march gave rise recently to a modern Spanish dance, a musical genre including both voice and instruments, and a genre of instrumental music often played during bullfight . Both the dance and the non martial compositions are also called pasodoble. Structure[ edit ] All pasodobles have binary rhythm . Its musical structure consists of an introduction based on the dominant chord of the piece, followed by a first fragment based on the main tone and a second part, called "the trío", based on the sub-dominant note, based yet again on the dominant chord. Each change is preceded by a brieph. The last segment of the pasodoble is usually "the trío" strongly played. [1] The different types of pasodoble – popular, taurino, militar – can vary in rhythm, with the taurine pasodobles being the slowest and the popular being faster and often incorporating voice. Pasodoble as we know it started in Spain but is now played in a wide variety of Hispanic nations. Each region has developed its own subgenre and personal style of pasodoble, adjusting some formal aspects of the structure to fit their local musical tradition. [2] In modern Spain, the most prolific composition of pasodobles takes place on the Valencian coast, associated to the festivals of Moors and Christians and the Falles . In the dance form is very free regarding figures. The dancers must remain one in front of the other, and keep their bodies parallel to each other at all times, leaning slightly to the left. They must give one step per tempo. The left hand of the male and the right hand of the woman must remain united almost permanently. Besides this, almost all motions and figures are accepted, which allows space for dramatization. The dance can be similar to the one-step, except for the speed and number of steps given. History[ edit ] The origin of this form of music is disputed. The facts known about it from historical evidence are that it was written as early as the 18th century, since Spain has pasodoble scores dating back to 1780; that it was incorporated into comedies and adopted as a regulatory step for the Spanish infantry; and that the music was not introduced into bullfights until the 19th century. One hypothesis suggests, based on the etymology of the name, that it comes from the French "pas-redouble", a form of speedy march of the French infantry during the late 18th century. It is claimed to have both Spanish and French characteristics. The modern steps often contain French terms, but the dance resembles the nature of the bullfight. It is said to have emerged from southern French culture during the 1930s. Supporters of this hypothesis, mostly French musicologists, suggested that pasodoble was a way for the French to portray the techniques used in Spanish bullfights. This hypothesis neglects to explain the presence of scores dating from 1780, that Spanish infantry already marched at double speed before the French army did and French musicologist usually refers the bullfight-related movements or themes, peculiarity that does not make sense since in Spain it was associated with bullfighting a long time later. A hypothesis based on the dance's free figures and rhythm states that its binary rhythm and moderated movement points to an origin in traditional Spanish music and dances of the early 16th century. These dances, developed around 1538, were a gradual combination of Castillian music and dance (seguidillas) with the "garrotín", a fast and repetitive Romani couples dance, adapted into a march form.[ citation needed ] Famous musicologist José Subirá considers that the origin of the style was a combination of military marches and light music from Spanish popular theatre, that gradually permeated the "entremeses" of more respectable plays.[ citation needed ] Others[ edit ] Famous bullfighters have been honored with pasodoble tunes named for them. Other tunes have been inspired by patriotic motifs or local characters. The pasodoble is well-known and used today for dance competitions. During the early 20th century, the pasodoble became part of the repertoire of Italian American musicians in San Francisco playing in the ballo liscio style. [3] Four pasodobles were collected by Sidney Robertson Cowell for the WPA California Folk Music Project in 1939 by Mexican American wedding party band on mandolin , guitar , and violin . [4] March pasodoble[ edit ] Also called "military pasodoble", it was created as, or keeps its role as, an infantry march. It is usually fast and lacks lyrics. [5] Famous examples are "Soldadito español", "El Abanico", "Los nardos", "Las Corsarias" or " Los Voluntarios" Taurine pasodoble[ edit ] Often played during bullfights, or with that intense atmosphere in mind. They are slowed and more dramatic than martial pasodobles, and lack lyrics, too. This pasodoble is based on music played at bullfights during the bullfighters' entrance (paseo), or during the passes (faena) just before the kill. It is also composed to honor outstanding bullfighters. [6] Some of the most famous are  Suspiros de España, España cañí, Agüero, La Gracia de Dios,1 El Gato Montés, Viva el pasodoble, Tercio de Quites, Pan y toros, Cielo Andaluz, La Morena de mi Copla, Francisco Alegre, Amparito Roca, El Beso, Plaza de las Ventas. Popular pasodoble[ edit ] Made to dance in popular celebrations and social reunions. They tend to be upbeat, but can also be emotional and introspective, with the occasional melancholic or patriotic theme. They usually require a small number of instruments and musicians and have lyrics. [7] Some famous examples are "Islas Canarias", "En er Mundo", "Costa Dorada" or "Valencia". Band pasodoble[ edit ] Pasodobles that require an entire band to be played, and are almost exclusively designed for popular parades and village celebrations. They often use colorful characters of the region and light hearted subjects as inspiration. This pasodobles are very alive in Spain, Today, the largest center for the mass production and creation of new pasodobles is the southeast of Spain, mainly the Valencian Community , related to the popular Moors and Christians festivals. The traditional ones can be heard in Spanish popular celebrations, patron saint verbenas, and weddings. [8] Well known examples are "Paquito el Chocolatero", "Fiesta en Benidorm", "Alegría Agostense" or "Pirata Quiero Ser". Display pasodoble[ edit ] A pasodoble performed mostly for spectacle purposes, sometimes in a bullfighting ring. This pasodoble may or may not have lyrics, but it often adapts other styles of pasodoble and just changes the dancing to make it more spectacular for the public – often tourists. Essentially, this pasodoble dance involves role-playing. This two-person dance form has the man performing as the bullfighter and the woman as the cape. [9] It is known as one of the fastest Latin ballroom dances because dancers make around 120 to 130 beats/steps per minute. Flamenco -like qualities infuse the dance as the man and woman challenge each other. Amparito Roca being played by a wind band The leader of this dance plays the part of the matador. The follower generally plays the part of the matador's cape, but can also represent the shadow of the matador, as well as the flamenco dancer in some figures. The follower never represents the bull, although this is a common misconception. This form of pasodoble is a lively style of dance to the duple meter march -like music, and is often performed in the context of theater. This form of pasodoble was mistakenly taken as the original form by English and French musicologists visiting Spain in the 20th century. Tunas[ edit ] Tunas is the name given to a brotherhood of students that play popular music together on the street to get some extra coins, or under the window of the beloved of one of them, to try and help the lovestruck member to get a date with her. Tunas have become one of the main forces keeping Spanish pasodoble alive. Tunas tend to adapt or repeat simple pieces that are already composed, but they sometimes compose their own, satirical pieces. [10] By region[ edit ] In addition to the Spanish pasodoble, already discussed, this rhythm has been adopted and modified by other nations: Mexican pasodoble[ edit ] Mexico has produced master composers of pasodoble, especially taurine pasodobles. Agustín Lara or Silverio Pérez . Some of the best known Mexican pasodobles are El Piti, El Charro Cárdenas, El abuelito, El banderillero, María Caballé, El Berrendito de San Juan, Tarde de toros, Toros en San Miguel, Joselito Huerta and Toros de Llaguno. Puerto Rican pasodobles[ edit ] Puerto Rican pasodobles are known for their nostalgic quality. Some of the most famous are: Ecos de Puerto Rico (El Maestro Ladi),  Morena ( Noro Morales ), Cuando pienso en España (Juan Peña Reyes), Reminiscencias (Juan Peña Reyes), El trueno ( Juan Peña Reyes ), Himno a Humacao (Miguel López), Sol andaluz (Manuel Peña Vázquez). Colombian pasodobles[ edit ] Pasodoble is not as popular in Colombia as in other countries, but the Colombia pasodoble, "Feria de Manizales", is an emblematic piece. It was composed in 1957, with lyrics by Guillermo González Ospina and music by Juan Mari Asins inspired by the Spanish classic " España cañí ". This pasodoble is based on the development of a parade and a dance with every single "Queen of the city" of Manizales, and it lasts one week.
An inorganic, nonmetallic solid prepared by the action of heat This article is about the material properties of ceramics. For other uses, see Ceramic (disambiguation) . Short timeline of ceramic in different styles A ceramic is any of the various hard, brittle , heat-resistant , and corrosion-resistant materials made by shaping and then firing an inorganic, nonmetallic material, such as clay , at a high temperature. [1] [2] Common examples are earthenware , porcelain , and brick . The earliest ceramics made by humans were brick walls used for building houses and other structures, while pottery objects (pots, vessels, or vases) or figurines made from clay , either by itself or mixed with other materials like silica , hardened and sintered in fire is the common belief of how ceramic was made. Later, ceramics were glazed and fired to create smooth, colored surfaces, decreasing porosity through the use of glassy, amorphous ceramic coatings on top of the crystalline ceramic substrates. [3] Ceramics now include domestic, industrial, and building products, as well as a wide range of materials developed for use in advanced ceramic engineering, such as semiconductors . The word ceramic comes from the Ancient Greek word κεραμικός (keramikós), meaning "of or for pottery" [4] (from κέραμος (kéramos) 'potter's clay, tile, pottery'). [5] The earliest known mention of the root ceram- is the Mycenaean Greek ke-ra-me-we, workers of ceramic, written in Linear B syllabic script. [6] The word ceramic can be used as an adjective to describe a material, product, or process, or it may be used as a noun, either singular or, more commonly, as the plural noun ceramics. [7] Materials[ edit ] Silicon nitride rocket thruster. Left: Mounted in test stand. Right: Being tested with H2/O2 propellants. Ceramic material is an inorganic, metallic oxide, nitride, or carbide material. Some elements, such as carbon or silicon , may be considered ceramics. Ceramic materials are brittle, hard, strong in compression, and weak in shearing and tension. They withstand the chemical erosion that occurs in other materials subjected to acidic or caustic environments. Ceramics generally can withstand very high temperatures, ranging from 1,000 °C to 1,600 °C (1,800 °F to 3,000 °F). A low magnification SEM micrograph of an advanced ceramic material. The properties of ceramics make fracturing an important inspection method. The crystallinity of ceramic materials varies widely. Most often, fired ceramics are either vitrified or semi-vitrified, as is the case with earthenware, stoneware , and porcelain. Varying crystallinity and electron composition in the ionic and covalent bonds cause most ceramic materials to be good thermal and electrical insulators (researched in ceramic engineering ). With such a large range of possible options for the composition/structure of a ceramic (nearly all of the elements, nearly all types of bonding, and all levels of crystallinity), the breadth of the subject is vast, and identifiable attributes ( hardness , toughness , electrical conductivity ) are difficult to specify for the group as a whole. General properties such as high melting temperature, high hardness, poor conductivity, high moduli of elasticity , chemical resistance, and low ductility are the norm, [8] with known exceptions to each of these rules ( piezoelectric ceramics , glass transition temperature, superconductive ceramics ). Composites such as fiberglass and carbon fiber , while containing ceramic materials, are not considered to be part of the ceramic family. [9] Highly oriented crystalline ceramic materials are not amenable to a great range of processing. Methods for dealing with them tend to fall into one of two categories: either making the ceramic in the desired shape by reaction in situ or "forming" powders into the desired shape and then sintering to form a solid body. Ceramic forming techniques include shaping by hand (sometimes including a rotation process called "throwing"), slip casting , tape casting (used for making very thin ceramic capacitors), injection molding , dry pressing, and other variations. Many ceramics experts do not consider materials with an amorphous (noncrystalline) character (i.e., glass) to be ceramics, even though glassmaking involves several steps of the ceramic process and its mechanical properties are similar to those of ceramic materials. However, heat treatments can convert glass into a semi-crystalline material known as glass-ceramic . [10] [11] Traditional ceramic raw materials include clay minerals such as kaolinite , whereas more recent materials include aluminium oxide, more commonly known as alumina . Modern ceramic materials, which are classified as advanced ceramics, include silicon carbide and tungsten carbide . Both are valued for their abrasion resistance and are therefore used in applications such as the wear plates of crushing equipment in mining operations. Advanced ceramics are also used in the medical, electrical, electronics, and armor industries. History[ edit ] Earliest known ceramics are the Gravettian figurines that date to 29,000–25,000 BC. Human beings appear to have been making their own ceramics for at least 26,000 years, subjecting clay and silica to intense heat to fuse and form ceramic materials. The earliest found so far were in southern central Europe and were sculpted figures, not dishes. [12] The earliest known pottery was made by mixing animal products with clay and firing it at up to 800 °C (1,500 °F). While pottery fragments have been found up to 19,000 years old, it was not until about 10,000 years later that regular pottery became common. An early people that spread across much of Europe is named after its use of pottery: the Corded Ware culture . These early Indo-European peoples decorated their pottery by wrapping it with rope while it was still wet. When the ceramics were fired, the rope burned off but left a decorative pattern of complex grooves on the surface. Corded-Ware culture pottery from 2500 BC The invention of the wheel eventually led to the production of smoother, more even pottery using the wheel-forming (throwing) technique, like the pottery wheel . Early ceramics were porous, absorbing water easily. It became useful for more items with the discovery of glazing techniques, which involved coating pottery with silicon, bone ash, or other materials that could melt and reform into a glassy surface, making a vessel less pervious to water. Archaeology[ edit ] Ceramic artifacts have an important role in archaeology for understanding the culture, technology, and behavior of peoples of the past. They are among the most common artifacts to be found at an archaeological site, generally in the form of small fragments of broken pottery called sherds . The processing of collected sherds can be consistent with two main types of analysis: technical and traditional. The traditional analysis involves sorting ceramic artifacts, sherds, and larger fragments into specific types based on style, composition, manufacturing, and morphology. By creating these typologies, it is possible to distinguish between different cultural styles, the purpose of the ceramic, and the technological state of the people, among other conclusions. Besides, by looking at stylistic changes in ceramics over time, it is possible to separate (seriate) the ceramics into distinct diagnostic groups (assemblages). A comparison of ceramic artifacts with known dated assemblages allows for a chronological assignment of these pieces. [13] The technical approach to ceramic analysis involves a finer examination of the composition of ceramic artifacts and sherds to determine the source of the material and, through this, the possible manufacturing site. Key criteria are the composition of the clay and the temper used in the manufacture of the article under study: the temper is a material added to the clay during the initial production stage and is used to aid the subsequent drying process. Types of temper include shell pieces, granite fragments, and ground sherd pieces called ' grog '. Temper is usually identified by microscopic examination of the tempered material. Clay identification is determined by a process of refiring the ceramic and assigning a color to it using Munsell Soil Color notation. By estimating both the clay and temper compositions and locating a region where both are known to occur, an assignment of the material source can be made. Based on the source assignment of the artifact, further investigations can be made into the site of manufacture. Properties[ edit ] The physical properties of any ceramic substance are a direct result of its crystalline structure and chemical composition. Solid-state chemistry reveals the fundamental connection between microstructure and properties, such as localized density variations, grain size distribution, type of porosity, and second-phase content, which can all be correlated with ceramic properties such as mechanical strength σ by the Hall-Petch equation, hardness , toughness , dielectric constant , and the optical properties exhibited by transparent materials . Ceramography is the art and science of preparation, examination, and evaluation of ceramic microstructures. Evaluation and characterization of ceramic microstructures are often implemented on similar spatial scales to that used commonly in the emerging field of nanotechnology: from nanometers to tens of micrometers (µm). This is typically somewhere between the minimum wavelength of visible light and the resolution limit of the naked eye. The microstructure includes most grains, secondary phases, grain boundaries, pores, micro-cracks, structural defects, and hardness micro indentions. Most bulk mechanical, optical, thermal, electrical, and magnetic properties are significantly affected by the observed microstructure. The fabrication method and process conditions are generally indicated by the microstructure. The root cause of many ceramic failures is evident in the cleaved and polished microstructure. Physical properties which constitute the field of materials science and engineering include the following: Cutting disks made of silicon carbide Mechanical properties are important in structural and building materials as well as textile fabrics. In modern materials science , fracture mechanics is an important tool in improving the mechanical performance of materials and components. It applies the physics of stress and strain , in particular the theories of elasticity and plasticity , to the microscopic crystallographic defects found in real materials in order to predict the macroscopic mechanical failure of bodies. Fractography is widely used with fracture mechanics to understand the causes of failures and also verify the theoretical failure predictions with real-life failures. Ceramic materials are usually ionic or covalent bonded materials. A material held together by either type of bond will tend to fracture before any plastic deformation takes place, which results in poor toughness in these materials. Additionally, because these materials tend to be porous, the pores and other microscopic imperfections act as stress concentrators , decreasing the toughness further, and reducing the tensile strength . These combine to give catastrophic failures , as opposed to the more ductile failure modes of metals. These materials do show plastic deformation . However, because of the rigid structure of crystalline material, there are very few available slip systems for dislocations to move, and so they deform very slowly. To overcome the brittle behavior, ceramic material development has introduced the class of ceramic matrix composite materials, in which ceramic fibers are embedded and with specific coatings are forming fiber bridges across any crack. This mechanism substantially increases the fracture toughness of such ceramics. Ceramic disc brakes are an example of using a ceramic matrix composite material manufactured with a specific process. Scientists are working on developing ceramic materials that can withstand significant deformation without breaking. A first such material that can deform in room temperature was found in 2024. [14] Ice-templating for enhanced mechanical properties[ edit ] If a ceramic is subjected to substantial mechanical loading, it can undergo a process called ice-templating , which allows some control of the microstructure of the ceramic product and therefore some control of the mechanical properties. Ceramic engineers use this technique to tune the mechanical properties to their desired application. Specifically, the strength is increased when this technique is employed. Ice templating allows the creation of macroscopic pores in a unidirectional arrangement. The applications of this oxide strengthening technique are important for solid oxide fuel cells and water filtration devices. [15] To process a sample through ice templating, an aqueous colloidal suspension is prepared to contain the dissolved ceramic powder evenly dispersed throughout the colloid,[ clarification needed ] for example Yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ). The solution is then cooled from the bottom to the top on a platform that allows for unidirectional cooling. This forces ice crystals to grow in compliance with the unidirectional cooling, and these ice crystals force the dissolved YSZ particles to the solidification front[ clarification needed ] of the solid-liquid interphase boundary, resulting in pure ice crystals lined up unidirectionally alongside concentrated pockets of colloidal particles. The sample is then heated and at the same the pressure is reduced enough to force the ice crystals to sublime and the YSZ pockets begin to anneal together to form macroscopically aligned ceramic microstructures. The sample is then further sintered to complete the evaporation of the residual water and the final consolidation of the ceramic microstructure.[ citation needed ] During ice-templating, a few variables can be controlled to influence the pore size and morphology of the microstructure. These important variables are the initial solids loading of the colloid, the cooling rate, the sintering temperature and duration, and the use of certain additives which can influence the microstructural morphology during the process. A good understanding of these parameters is essential to understanding the relationships between processing, microstructure, and mechanical properties of anisotropically porous materials. [16] Semiconductors[ edit ] Some ceramics are semiconductors . Most of these are transition metal oxides that are II-VI semiconductors, such as zinc oxide . While there are prospects of mass-producing blue LEDs from zinc oxide, ceramicists are most interested in the electrical properties that show grain boundary effects. One of the most widely used of these is the varistor. These are devices that exhibit the property that resistance drops sharply at a certain threshold voltage . Once the voltage across the device reaches the threshold, there is a breakdown of the electrical structure[ clarification needed ] in the vicinity of the grain boundaries, which results in its electrical resistance dropping from several megohms down to a few hundred ohms . The major advantage of these is that they can dissipate a lot of energy, and they self-reset; after the voltage across the device drops below the threshold, its resistance returns to being high. This makes them ideal for surge-protection applications; as there is control over the threshold voltage and energy tolerance, they find use in all sorts of applications. The best demonstration of their ability can be found in electrical substations , where they are employed to protect the infrastructure from lightning strikes. They have rapid response, are low maintenance, and do not appreciably degrade from use, making them virtually ideal devices for this application. Semiconducting ceramics are also employed as gas sensors . When various gases are passed over a polycrystalline ceramic, its electrical resistance changes. With tuning to the possible gas mixtures, very inexpensive devices can be produced. Superconductivity[ edit ] The Meissner effect demonstrated by levitating a magnet above a cuprate superconductor, which is cooled by liquid nitrogen Under some conditions, such as extremely low temperatures, some ceramics exhibit high-temperature superconductivity . [ clarification needed ] The reason for this is not understood, but there are two major families of superconducting ceramics. Ferroelectricity and supersets[ edit ] Piezoelectricity , a link between electrical and mechanical response, is exhibited by a large number of ceramic materials, including the quartz used to measure time in watches and other electronics. Such devices use both properties of piezoelectrics, using electricity to produce a mechanical motion (powering the device) and then using this mechanical motion to produce electricity (generating a signal). The unit of time measured is the natural interval required for electricity to be converted into mechanical energy and back again. The piezoelectric effect is generally stronger in materials that also exhibit pyroelectricity , and all pyroelectric materials are also piezoelectric. These materials can be used to inter-convert between thermal, mechanical, or electrical energy; for instance, after synthesis in a furnace, a pyroelectric crystal allowed to cool under no applied stress generally builds up a static charge of thousands of volts. Such materials are used in motion sensors , where the tiny rise in temperature from a warm body entering the room is enough to produce a measurable voltage in the crystal. In turn, pyroelectricity is seen most strongly in materials that also display the ferroelectric effect , in which a stable electric dipole can be oriented or reversed by applying an electrostatic field. Pyroelectricity is also a necessary consequence of ferroelectricity. This can be used to store information in ferroelectric capacitors , elements of ferroelectric RAM . The most common such materials are lead zirconate titanate and barium titanate . Aside from the uses mentioned above, their strong piezoelectric response is exploited in the design of high-frequency loudspeakers , transducers for sonar , and actuators for atomic force and scanning tunneling microscopes . Positive thermal coefficient[ edit ] Temperature increases can cause grain boundaries to suddenly become insulating in some semiconducting ceramic materials, mostly mixtures of heavy metal titanates . The critical transition temperature can be adjusted over a wide range by variations in chemistry. In such materials, current will pass through the material until joule heating brings it to the transition temperature, at which point the circuit will be broken and current flow will cease. Such ceramics are used as self-controlled heating elements in, for example, the rear-window defrost circuits of automobiles. At the transition temperature, the material's dielectric response becomes theoretically infinite. While a lack of temperature control would rule out any practical use of the material near its critical temperature, the dielectric effect remains exceptionally strong even at much higher temperatures. Titanates with critical temperatures far below room temperature have become synonymous with "ceramic" in the context of ceramic capacitors for just this reason. Cermax xenon arc lamp with synthetic sapphire output window Optically transparent materials focus on the response of a material to incoming light waves of a range of wavelengths. Frequency selective optical filters can be utilized to alter or enhance the brightness and contrast of a digital image. Guided lightwave transmission via frequency selective waveguides involves the emerging field of fiber optics and the ability of certain glassy compositions as a transmission medium for a range of frequencies simultaneously ( multi-mode optical fiber ) with little or no interference between competing wavelengths or frequencies. This resonant mode of energy and data transmission via electromagnetic (light) wave propagation , though low powered, is virtually lossless. Optical waveguides are used as components in Integrated optical circuits (e.g. light-emitting diodes , LEDs) or as the transmission medium in local and long haul optical communication systems. Also of value to the emerging materials scientist is the sensitivity of materials to radiation in the thermal infrared (IR) portion of the electromagnetic spectrum . This heat-seeking ability is responsible for such diverse optical phenomena as night-vision and IR luminescence . Thus, there is an increasing need in the military sector for high-strength, robust materials which have the capability to transmit light ( electromagnetic waves ) in the visible (0.4 – 0.7 micrometers) and mid- infrared (1 – 5 micrometers) regions of the spectrum. These materials are needed for applications requiring transparent armor, including next-generation high-speed missiles and pods, as well as protection against improvised explosive devices (IED). In the 1960s, scientists at General Electric (GE) discovered that under the right manufacturing conditions, some ceramics, especially aluminium oxide (alumina), could be made translucent . These translucent materials were transparent enough to be used for containing the electrical plasma generated in high- pressure sodium street lamps. During the past two decades, additional types of transparent ceramics have been developed for applications such as nose cones for heat-seeking missiles , windows for fighter aircraft , and scintillation counters for computed tomography scanners. Other ceramic materials, generally requiring greater purity in their make-up than those above, include forms of several chemical compounds, including: Barium titanate : (often mixed with strontium titanate ) displays ferroelectricity , meaning that its mechanical, electrical, and thermal responses are c Sialon (silicon aluminium oxynitride) has high strength; resistance to thermal shock, chemical and wear resistance, and low density. These ceramics are used in non-ferrous molten metal handling, weld pins, and the chemical industry. Silicon carbide (SiC) is used as a susceptor in microwave furnaces, a commonly used abrasive, and as a refractory material . Steatite (magnesium silicates) is used as an electrical insulator . Titanium carbide Used in space shuttle re-entry shields and scratchproof watches.
Toggle the table of contents Gardening From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Practice of growing and cultivating plants For the cryptographic concept, see Gardening (cryptanalysis) . For people who garden, see Gardener . A gardener maintaining topiary in Tulcán , Ecuador Gardening is the process of growing plants for their vegetables , fruits , flowers , herbs , and appearances within a designated space. [1] Gardens fulfill a wide assortment of purposes, notably the production of aesthetically pleasing areas, medicines , cosmetics , dyes , foods , poisons , wildlife habitats , and saleable goods (see market gardening ). People often partake in gardening for its therapeutic , health , educational , cultural , philosophical , environmental , and religious benefits. [2] Berms of fava beans have been planted at Hayes Valley Farm, a community-built farm on the former Central freeway ramps of San Francisco Gardening varies in scale from the 800 hectare Versailles gardens [3] down to container gardens grown inside. Gardens take many forms, some only contain one type of plant while others involve a complex assortment of plants with no particular order. Gardening can be difficult to differentiate from farming . They are most easily differentiated based on their primary objectives. Farming prioritizes saleable goods and may include livestock production whereas gardening often prioritizes aesthetics and leisure . As it pertains to food production, gardening generally happens on a much smaller scale with the intent of personal or community consumption . [4] It is important to note that there are cultures which do not differentiate between farming and gardening. [5] This is primarily because subsistence agriculture has been the main method of farming throughout its 12,000 year history and is virtually indistinguishable from gardening. [6] [7] Main article: Indigenous horticulture Plant domestication is seen as the birth of agriculture. However, it is arguably proceeded by a very long history of gardening wild plants. While the 12,000 year-old date is the commonly accepted timeline describing plant domestication, there is now evidence from the Ohalo II hunter-gatherer site showing earlier signs of disturbing the soil and cultivation of pre-domesticated crop species. [8] This evidence pushes early stage plant domestication to 23,000 years ago which aligns with research done by Allaby (2022) showing slight selection pressure of desirable traits in Southwest Asian cereals (einkorn, emmer, barley). [9] Despite not qualifying as plant domestication , there are many archaeological studies pushing the potential date of hominin selective ecosystem disturbance back up to 125,000 years ago. [10] Much of these early recorded ecosystem disturbances were made through hominin use of fire , which dates back to 1.5 Mya (although at this time fire was not likely being wielded as a landscape-changing tool by hominids). [11] This anthropogenic ecosystem disturbance may be the origins of gardening. Every hunter-gatherer society has developed a niche of some sort, allowing them to thrive or even just survive amongst their environments. [12] Many of these prehistoric hunter-gatherers had constructed a niche allowing for easier access to, or a higher amount of edible plant species. [13] This shift from hunting and gathering to increasingly modifying the environment in a way which produces an abundance of edible plant species marks the beginning of gardening. [14] One of the most documented hominin niches is the use of off-site fire. [15] When done intentionally, this is often called forest gardening or fire stick farming in Australia. [16] The modern study of fire ecology describes the many benefits off-site fires may have granted these early humans. [17] Some of these agroecological practices have been well documented and studied during colonial contact. However, they are vastly under represented in research done on early hominin fire use. [18] Based on current research, it is evident that these niches developed separately in different societies across different times and locations. [19] Many of the  Indigenous gardening methods were and still are often overlooked by colonizers due to the lack of resemblance to western gardens with well defined borders and non-naturalized plant species. [20] The Americas[ edit ] There are long traditions of gardening within Indigenous societies spanning from the northernmost parts of Canada down to the southernmost tip of Chile and Argentina . [21] [22] [23] [24] The Arctic and Subarctic societies relied primarily on hunting and fishing due to the harsh climate although they have been known to collectively use at least 311 different plants as foods or medicines. [25] The substantial knowledge and use of these plants along with the communal harvesting sites and emphasis on reciprocity between humans and plants indicates a basic level of gardening. [26] [27] [28] Similarly, the Fuegian Indigenous groups in South America had developed seemingly comparable niches due to a similar tundra ecosystem. While there are very few studies on the Fuegians, Darwin mentioned wild edible plants such as fungi , kelp , and wild celery growing next to the various Fuegian shelters. [29] [30] [31] From the Drake manuscript, this is a drawing done by an anonymous Frenchman in the 16th century. It shows an Indigenous garden planted with papaya, pineapple, maize, beans, and cucurbits. Horticulture plays a relatively small role in these northern and southern tundra inhabitants compared with Indigenous societies in grassland and forest ecosystems. From the boreal forests of Canada to the temperate forests and grasslands of Chile and Argentina different communities have developed food production niches. These include the use of fire for ecosystem maintenance and resetting successional sequences, the sowing of wild annuals, the sowing of domesticated annuals (e.g. three sisters , New World crops ), creating berry patches and orchards, manipulation of plants to encourage desired traits(e.g. increased nut, fruit, or root production), and landscape modification to encourage plant and animal growth (e.g. complex irrigation or terraces ). [32] [33] These modified landscapes as recorded by early American philosophers such as Thoreau , and Emmerson were described as exhibiting pristine beauty. [34] [35] Indigenous gardens such as forest gardens therefore do not only serve as a producer of foods, medicines, or materials, but also pleasant aesthetics. [36] Ancient times[ edit ] Forest gardening , a forest-based food production system, is the world's oldest form of gardening. [38] After the emergence of the first civilizations , wealthy individuals began to create gardens for aesthetic purposes. Ancient Egyptian tomb paintings from the New Kingdom (around 1500 BC) provide some of the earliest physical evidence of ornamental horticulture and landscape design; they depict lotus ponds surrounded by symmetrical rows of acacias and palms . A notable example of ancient ornamental gardens were the Hanging Gardens of Babylon —one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World —while ancient Rome had dozens of gardens. Wealthy ancient Egyptians used gardens for providing shade. Egyptians associated trees and gardens with gods, believing that their deities were pleased by gardens. Gardens in ancient Egypt were often surrounded by walls with trees planted in rows. Among the most popular species planted were date palms , sycamores, fig trees , nut trees, and willows . These gardens were a sign of higher socioeconomic status. In addition, wealthy ancient Egyptians grew vineyards, as wine was a sign of the higher social classes. Roses , poppies, daisies and irises could all also be found in the gardens of the Egyptians. Assyria was renowned for its beautiful gardens. These tended to be wide and large, some of them used for hunting game—rather like a game reserve today—and others as leisure gardens. Cypresses and palms were some of the most frequently planted types of trees. Gardens were also available in Kush . In Musawwarat es-Sufra , the Great Enclosure dated to the 3rd century BC included splendid gardens. [39] Ancient Roman gardens were laid out with hedges and vines and contained a wide variety of flowers— acanthus , cornflowers , crocus , cyclamen , hyacinth, iris, ivy, lavender , lilies, myrtle, narcissus, poppy, rosemary and violets [40] —as well as statues and sculptures. Flower beds were popular in the courtyards of rich Romans. The Middle Ages[ edit ] A gardener at work, 1607 The Middle Ages represent a period of decline in gardens for aesthetic purposes. After the fall of Rome, gardening was done for the purpose of growing medicinal herbs and/or decorating church altars . Monasteries carried on a tradition of garden design and intense horticultural techniques during the medieval period in Europe . Generally, monastic garden types consisted of kitchen gardens, infirmary gardens, cemetery orchards , cloister garths and vineyards. Individual monasteries might also have had a "green court", a plot of grass and trees where horses could graze, as well as a cellarer's garden or private gardens for obedientiaries, monks who held specific posts within the monastery. Islamic gardens were built after the model of Persian gardens and they were usually enclosed by walls and divided in four by watercourses. Commonly, the centre of the garden would have a reflecting pool or pavilion . Specific to the Islamic gardens are the mosaics and glazed tiles used to decorate the rills and fountains that were built in these gardens. By the late 13th century, rich Europeans began to grow gardens for leisure and for medicinal herbs and vegetables. [40] They surrounded the gardens by walls to protect them from animals and to provide seclusion . [41] During the next two centuries, Europeans started planting lawns and raising flowerbeds and trellises of roses. Fruit trees were common in these gardens and also in some, there were turf seats. At the same time, the gardens in the monasteries were a place to grow flowers and medicinal herbs but they were also a space where the monks could enjoy nature and relax. The gardens in the 16th and 17th century were symmetric , proportioned and balanced with a more classical appearance. Most of these gardens were built around a central axis and they were divided into different parts by hedges. Commonly, gardens had flowerbeds laid out in squares and separated by gravel paths. Gardens in Renaissance were adorned with sculptures, topiary and fountains. In the 17th century, knot gardens became popular along with the hedge mazes . By this time, Europeans started planting new flowers such as tulips , marigolds and sunflowers . Cottage gardens[ edit ] A cottage garden in Brittany Cottage gardens , which emerged in Elizabethan times , appear to have originated as a local source for herbs and fruits. [42] One theory is that they arose out of the Black Death of the 1340s, when the death of so many laborers made land available for small cottages with personal gardens. [43] According to the late 19th-century legend of origin, [44] these gardens were originally created by the workers that lived in the cottages of the villages, to provide them with food and herbs, with flowers planted among them for decoration. Farm workers were provided with cottages that had architectural quality set in a small garden—about 1 acre (0.40 hectares)—where they could grow food and keep pigs and chickens. [45] Authentic gardens of the yeoman cottager would have included a beehive and livestock , and frequently a pig and sty, along with a well. The peasant cottager of medieval times was more interested in meat than flowers, with herbs grown for medicinal use rather than for their beauty. By Elizabethan times there was more prosperity, and thus more room to grow flowers. Even the early cottage garden flowers typically had their practical use—violets were spread on the floor (for their pleasant scent and keeping out vermin); calendulas and primroses were both attractive and used in cooking. Others, such as sweet William and hollyhocks , were grown entirely for their beauty. [46] Sheffield Park Garden , a landscape garden originally laid out in the 18th century by Capability Brown In the 18th century, gardens were laid out more naturally, without any walls. This style of smooth undulating grass, which would run straight to the house, clumps, belts and scattering of trees and serpentine lakes formed by invisibly damming small rivers, were a new style within the English landscape. This was a "gardenless" form of landscape gardening, which swept away almost all the remnants of previous formally patterned styles. The English landscape garden usually included a lake, lawns set against groves of trees , and often contained shrubberies, grottoes, pavilions, bridges and follies such as mock temples, Gothic ruins, bridges, and other picturesque architecture, designed to recreate an idyllic pastoral landscape. This new style emerged in England in the early 18th century, and spread across Europe, replacing the more formal, symmetrical garden à la française of the 17th century as the principal gardening style of Europe. [47] The English garden presented an idealized view of nature. They were often inspired by paintings of landscapes by Claude Lorraine and Nicolas Poussin , and some were Influenced by the classic Chinese gardens of the East, [48] which had recently been described by European travelers. [48] The work of Lancelot 'Capability' Brown was particularly influential. Also, in 1804 the Horticultural Society was formed. Gardens of the 19th century contained plants such as the monkey puzzle or Chile pine . This is also the time when the so-called " gardenesque " style of gardens evolved. These gardens displayed a wide variety of flowers in a rather small space. Rock gardens increased in popularity in the 19th century. In ancient India, patterns from sacred geometry and mandalas were used to design gardens. Distinct mandala patterns denoted specific deities, planets, or even constellations. Such a garden was also referred to as a 'Mandala Vaatika'. The word 'Vaatika' can mean garden, plantation or parterre. Main article: List of garden types Residential gardening takes place near the home, in a space referred to as the garden. Although a garden typically is located on the land near a residence, it may also be located on a roof , in an atrium , on a balcony , in a window box , on a patio or vivarium . Hanging baskets in Thornbury, South Gloucestershire Gardening also takes place in non-residential green areas, such as parks, public or semi-public gardens ( botanical gardens or zoological gardens ), amusement parks , along transportation corridors, and around tourist attractions and garden hotels . In these situations, a staff of gardeners or groundskeepers maintains the gardens. An organic garden on a school campus Indoor gardening is concerned with the growing of houseplants within a residence or building, in a conservatory , or in a greenhouse . Indoor gardens are sometimes incorporated as part of air conditioning or heating systems. Indoor gardening extends the growing season in the fall and spring and can be used for winter gardening . Native plant gardening is concerned with the use of native plants with or without the intent of creating wildlife habitat . The goal is to create a garden in harmony with, and adapted to a given area. This type of gardening typically reduces water usage, maintenance, and fertilization costs, while increasing native faunal interest. Water gardening is concerned with growing plants adapted to pools and ponds. Bog gardens are also considered a type of water garden. These all require special conditions and considerations. A simple water garden may consist solely of a tub containing the water and plant(s). In aquascaping , a garden is created within an aquarium tank. Container gardening is concerned with growing plants in any type of container either indoors or outdoors. Common containers are pots, hanging baskets , and planters. Container gardening is usually used in atriums and on balconies, patios, and roof tops. Hügelkultur is concerned with growing plants on piles of rotting wood, as a form of raised bed gardening and composting in situ . [49] An English loanword from German, it means "mound garden". Toby Hemenway , noted permaculture author and teacher, considers wood buried in trenches to also be a form of hugelkultur referred to as a dead wood swale . [50] Hugelkultur is practiced by Sepp Holzer as a method of forest gardening and agroforestry , and by Geoff Lawton as a method of dryland farming and desert greening . [51] When used as a method of disposing of large volumes of waste wood and woody debris, hugelkultur accomplishes carbon sequestration . [49] It is also a form of xeriscaping . Community gardening is a social activity in which an area of land is gardened by a group of people, providing access to fresh produce, herbs, flowers and plants as well as access to satisfying labor, neighborhood improvement, sense of community and connection to the environment. [52] [53] Community gardens are typically owned in trust by local governments or nonprofits. [54] Garden sharing partners landowners with gardeners in need of land. These shared gardens, typically front or back yards , are usually used to produce food that is divided between the two parties. Organic gardening uses natural, sustainable methods, fertilizers and pesticides to grow non- genetically modified crops . Biodynamic gardening or biodynamic agriculture is similar to organic gardening, but includes various esoteric concepts drawn from the ideas of Rudolf Steiner , such as astrological sowing and planting calendar and particular field and compost preparations. Commercial gardening is a more intensive type of gardening that involves the production of vegetables, non-tropical fruits, and flowers from local farmers. Commercial gardening began because farmers would sell locally to stop food from spoiling faster because of the transportation of goods from a far distance. Mediterranean agriculture is also a common practice that commercial gardeners use. Mediterranean agriculture is the practice of cultivating animals such as sheep to help weed and provide manure for vine crops, grains, or citrus. Gardeners can easily train these animals to not eat the actual plant. [55] No-dig gardening (or no till gardening) is a method of gardening that avoids tillage as much as possible. This method of gardening is gaining popularity in part due to celebrated figures such as Charles Dowding , Masanobu Fukuoka , Jean-Martin Fortier , Connor Crickmore , Jesse Frost, Elaine Ingham , and many other market gardeners. Minimal tillage has been documented to help with promoting diverse soil biology , water retention and drainage, healthier vigorous plants, reduction in weed pressure, reduction in labor, increased fertility and nutrient availability, increase carbon sequestration, reduction in cost, reduction in soil erosion, and reduction in pollution. [56] [57] [58] [59] Tools[ edit ] Regardless of historical time period, location, scale, or type of garden, all gardening requires some basic tools . [60] For the majority of human history, people have managed with significantly fewer resources compared to modern times. Agriculture was built on the use of hands, stones, sticks, human ingenuity, and fire. [61] The essential tools used in pre- bronze age gardening were non-metal (primarily stone, bone, wood, or copper) knives, axes, adzes, foot ploughs , sickles, hoes, baskets, pottery, digging sticks, animal-driven ploughs, animals, and fire for clearing land. [62] [63] [64] [65] Up until the green revolution these simple tools, although continually improved upon, would continue to be the backbone of agricultural societies. [66] Harrowing a field on the Canterbury Agricultural College farm in 1948. The industrial revolution created a large increase in availability and impact of agricultural tools. These tools include tractors with modern implements, manure spreaders, cultivators , mowers, earth-moving machines, hedge trimmers, strimmer's, wood-chippers, two-wheel tractors , complex irrigation systems, plastic mulch , plastic shelters, seeding trays, indoor grow lights , packaging, chemical fertilizers , pesticides , genetically modified seeds , and many more. Plant Propagation[ edit ] Plants may be propagated through many different methods. These methods are classified as either sexual or asexual propagation. [67] Asexual reproduction[ edit ] Asexual reproduction occurs when plants produce clonal offspring . This method of reproduction is often more simplistic and provides rapid population growth. Cloning may result in highly vulnerable plant populations if they do not also reproduce sexually in order to create genetic diversity thus allowing for certain levels of natural selection and hybrid vigor . [68] There are various methods of asexual plant propagation taken advantage of by gardeners. These include vegetative propagation which involves the growth of new plants from vegetative parts of the parent plant, such as roots, stems, and leaves. [69] Certain plants such as strawberries and raspberries produce stolons or rhizomes which are stems which grow horizontally above or below ground, developing new plants at nodes. Another common method of asexual reproduction in garden plants is fragmentation which involves a separation from the parent plant. [70] This is common for shrubs, and trees such as willows which may shed their branches which is termed cladoptosis . Placing the shed limb into water or soil produces budding and causes roots to form. [71] Stolons growing from nodes from a corm of Crocosmia Perhaps the most commonly-known method of asexual reproduction in gardening and farming is grafting . A human may chose to graft an excellent fruit producing cultivar on a selected rootstock cultivar of the same species. [72] This involves cutting each plant and connecting the cuttings by mechanical means until they inosculate or fuse together. Grafting is done for many purposes. Firstly, the scion (portion of the plant above the graft site) can undergo artificial selection for specific desirable traits such as flavor while the rootstock can undergo selection for traits such as disease resistance or cold tolerance. [73] This effectively allows for much more efficiency in the artificial selection process as certain traits such as fruit taste can be ignored altogether in the rootstock allowing for a focused selection with less backcrossing to a plant that had good tasting fruit. Secondly, grafting allows for plants that require cross pollination for fruit generation, such as apples, to all grow together as one tree. [74] Thirdly, this allows for quick reproduction where one mother plant can produce many semi-developed clones each year. [75] [76] Sexual reproduction[ edit ] Sexual reproduction occurs through the pollination of a ovule . This pollination must occur between female and male parts of a single flower or between flowers. A plant may undergo self pollination as a sexual means of reproduction where the genes of the mother plant will not perfectly match those of the progeny. Progeny from self pollination will however have less genetic diversity than plants from cross pollination which may result in inbreeding depression . [77] Pollen is typically carried by wind, insects, or animals to complete pollination. Some greenhouses may have to manually pollinate their plants to produce fruit and seeds due to a lack of these conditions. Sexual reproduction can only be done by members of the same species and this produces varying levels of genetic diversity in the plants offspring. This genetic diversity is responsible for the survival of every plant as we know them today. [78] The diversity allows for disease resistance, adaptations to changing climate, changes in soil, changes in pollination methods, changes in animal grazing pressure, changes in weed pressure, and any other variations that arise in their growing conditions. Crossing plants, or hybridizing, results in hybrid vigor and will increase the genetic diversity. [79] Time course imaging of two maize inbreds (LH198 and PHG47) and the F1 hybrid (LH198/PHG47) generated by crossing the two together. Many commercially grown plants are F1 hybrids which ensures certain desirable traits. A common alternative to growing hybrid plants is to grow heirloom or open pollinated plants which, unlike F1 hybrids, will produce viable seed with progeny similar to its parent. [80] Many modern gardeners will save seeds from heirloom varieties but not hybrids due to the certainty of desirable traits heirloom seeds provide. Historically a lack of plant breeding knowledge would have led to more hybridization and the creation of new genetically diverse landraces . [81] Each plant varies in its likelihood of outcrossing . [82] Highly outcrossing plants such as spinach are more likely to create landraces. [83] [84] Many landraces and heirloom varieties along with their genetics are being lost due to the decrease in seed saving by modern farmers. [85] This leads plant geneticists to search for desirable genetics in wild ancestral varieties of commonly grown plants. [86] Plants have been artificially selected and bred since at least 7800 BCE. [87] Despite the decrease in farmer seed saving, many landraces are also being created through artificial selection and genetic modification . [88] Gardeners remain vital in the preservation of diverse genetics whether they maintain a family heirloom variety bred to fit conditions from the distant past, or they breed new landraces with traits matching their modern climate and growing condition. [89] Certain seeds may not sprout without certain environmental conditions.  These seeds either require scarification or stratification . [90] Gardeners may grow frustrated if they lack this crucial knowledge before attempting to propagate certain plants such as hard neck garlic (asexual reproduction), which requires a cold dormant period to sprout, or saskatoon berries which have improved germination after being digested by bears through a process called endozoochory . [91] Transplanting[ edit ] Cashew (Anacardium occidentale) grafted seedlings ready for transplanting at the Agroplan Mudas nursery, in Pacajus, Ceará, Brazil. Many gardeners, especially those who live in colder climates, will start seeds indoors prior to transplanting the young plant outside. [92] This provides many benefits such as elongating the growing season, ensuring adequate quantities and quality of light, ensuring seedlings have adequate nutrients in the seed starting mix, ensuring seeds stay at correct humidity, heat, and moisture level for germination, and saving space in the garden. [93] [94] Many crops will not be harvestable unless they are started inside so if a gardener wants to plant these crops in their garden without starting the plants themselves, they will need to purchase transplants which are commonly available at garden centers , plant nurseries , and big-box stores . It is crucial that transplanting is done correctly. This generally implies providing the plants with enough soil so they do not become root-bound (roots wrapping in circles around transplant container), providing a hardening-off period (slow exposure to sun, wind, and cold), providing sufficient light, water, and nutrients, and choosing the correct plants to start indoors as some plants do not do well with the transplanting process. [95] There are varying methods of starting your seeds. The most prevalent method would be to start seeds in transplant (plug) trays or in planters/pots. Another method is starting seeds in soil blocks which may reduce transplant shock and stop root-binding due to their ability to air prune the roots. [96] Some plants such as onions and various herbs may be efficiently started by scattering their seeds on top of soil in a large tray where the seedlings will later be teased apart from each other and replanted in the garden or pots. [97] Pests[ edit ] Garden pests are generally plants , fungi , or animals (frequently insects ) that engage in activity that the gardener considers undesirable. A pest may crowd out desirable plants, disturb soil, stunt the growth of young seedlings, steal or damage fruit, or otherwise kill plants, hamper their growth, damage their appearance, or reduce the quality of the edible or ornamental portions of the plant. Aphids , spider mites , slugs , snails , ants , birds , and even cats are commonly considered to be garden pests. Throughout history ecosystems that have undergone rapid changes are typically those which harbor the most pests. [98] For example, a highly and rapidly altered landscape such as modern canola fields in the Americas can be a breeding ground for pests of the Brassicaceae family. [99] A natural ecosystem will typically regulate pest levels through many biological means whether that be the natural introduction of a disease or an increase in the population of a predator species of animal. [100] The flame flower ( Tropaeolum speciosum ), climbs  over other plants to a sunlit position Because gardeners may have different goals, organisms considered "garden pests" vary from gardener to gardener. Tropaeolum speciosum , for example, may be considered a desirable and ornamental garden plant, or it may be considered a pest if it seeds and starts to grow where it is not wanted. As another example, in lawns , moss can become dominant and be impossible to eradicate. In some lawns, lichens , especially very damp lawn lichens such as Peltigera lactucfolia and P. membranacea, can become difficult to control and are considered pests. Pest control[ edit ] There are many ways by which unwanted pests are removed from a garden. The techniques vary depending on the pest, the gardener's goals, and the gardener's philosophy. For example, snails may be dealt with through the use of a chemical pesticide, an organic pesticide, hand-picking, barriers, or simply growing snail-resistant plants. On a large scale pest control is often done through the use of pesticides and herbicides , which may be either organic or artificially synthesized. Pesticides may affect the ecology of a garden due to their effects on the populations of both target and non-target species. For example, unintended exposure to some neonicotinoid pesticides has been proposed as a factor in the recent decline in honey bee populations. [101] Pesticides and herbicides are also known to cause medical issues, typically to those in proximity during their application. [102] While farm workers are by far the most affected by the use of pesticides and herbicides, they are often under-informed or accept the consequences due to financial necessity. [103] Fungicides may be applied to the seed coat to reduce mortality of germinating seedlings. [104] The improper use of pesticides often leads to pesticide resistance which poses a risk in global food security. [105] With climate change affecting the distribution of pests, a global increase in pesticide usage has been observed which in turn has caused an increase of human health risks due to exposure. [106] Creating new pesticides in order to manage resistant organisms is an immense expense and is often heavily criticized as an ineffective method of pest control. [107] Crop under row cover to protect plants from pest damage. Other means of control include the removal of infected plants, using fertilizers and bio stimulants to improve the health and vigor of plants so they better resist attack, practicing crop rotation to prevent pest build-up, using foliar sprays, companion planting , and practicing good garden hygiene, such as disinfecting tools and clearing debris and weeds which may harbor pests. [108] Another common method of pest control, used frequently in market gardening, is using insect netting or plastic greenhouse covers. [109] Gardeners may rely on one type of pest in order to eliminate another. Some examples of this are cats which hunt mice and rats, wild birds, bats, chickens, and ducks which hunt insects and slugs, or thorny hedges to deter deer and other creatures. Using these organisms to help control pests is called biological pest control . There are also targeted measures of animal pest control such as a mole vibrator which can deter mole activity in a garden, or automated gun shots to scare off birds. [110] CCI .22LR snake shot loaded with #12 shot Main article: Garden gun Garden guns are smooth-bore shotguns specifically made to fire .22 caliber snake shot , and are commonly used by gardeners and farmers for pest control. Garden guns are short-range weapons that can do little harm past 15 to 20 yards (14 to 18 m) and are relatively quiet when fired with snake shot, compared to a standard ammunition. These guns are especially effective inside of barns and sheds, as the snake shot will not shoot holes in the roof or walls, or more importantly injure livestock with a ricochet . They are also used for pest control at airports , warehouses , and stockyards . [111] Social aspects[ edit ] People can express their political or social views in gardens, intentionally or not. The lawn vs. garden issue is played out in urban planning as the debate over the " land ethic " that is to determine urban land use and whether hyper hygienist bylaws (e.g. weed control ) should apply, or whether land should generally be allowed to exist in its natural wild state. In a famous Canadian Charter of Rights case, "Sandra Bell vs. City of Toronto", 1997, the right to cultivate all native species, even most varieties deemed noxious or allergenic, was upheld as part of the right of free expression . Community gardening comprises a wide variety of approaches to sharing land and gardens. Garden at the Schultenhof in Mettingen , North Rhine-Westphalia , Germany People often surround their house and garden with a hedge. Common hedge plants are privet , hawthorn , beech , yew , leyland cypress , hemlock , arborvitae , barberry , box , holly , oleander , forsythia and lavender . The idea of open gardens without hedges may be distasteful to those who enjoy privacy. The Slow Food movement has sought in some countries to add an edible school yard and garden classrooms to schools, e.g. in Fergus, Ontario , where these were added to a public school to augment the kitchen classroom. Garden sharing , where urban landowners allow gardeners to grow on their property in exchange for a share of the harvest, is associated with the desire to control the quality of one's food, and reconnect with soil and community. [112] In US and British usage, the production of ornamental plantings around buildings is called landscaping , landscape maintenance or grounds keeping, while international usage uses the term gardening for these same activities. Also gaining popularity is the concept of "Green Gardening" which involves growing plants using organic fertilizers and pesticides so that the gardening process – or the flowers and fruits produced thereby – doesn't adversely affect the environment or people's health in any manner. Laws and restrictions[ edit ] In some parts of the world, particularly the United States, gardening can be restricted by law or by rules and regulations imposed by a home-owner's association. [113] In the United States, such rules may prohibit homeowners from growing vegetable gardens, prohibit xeriscaping or meadow gardens, or require garden plants to be chosen from a pre-approved list, to preserve the aesthetics of the neighborhood. [114] [115] [116] Numerous challenges to these laws, ordinances and regulations have emerged in recent years, with some resulting in legislation protecting a homeowner's right to cultivate native plants or grow vegetables. [117] [118] Laws protecting a homeowner's right to grow food plants have been termed "right to garden" laws. Benefits[ edit ] Gardening is considered by many people to be a relaxing activity. There are also many studies about the positive effects on mental and physical health in relation to gardening. [119] Specifically, gardening is thought to increase self-esteem and reduce stress . [120] As writer and former teacher Sarah Biddle notes, one's garden may become a "tiny oasis to relax and recharge [one's] batteries." [121] Involving in gardening activities aid in creativity, observational skills, learning, planning and physical movement. [122] Others consider gardening to be a good hedge against supply chain disruptions with increased worries that the public cannot always trust that the grocery store shelves will be fully stocked. [123] In April 2022, about 31% of grocery products were out of stock which is an 11% increase from November 2021. [124] Gardening can also support good numbers and a wide range of pollinators , but worryingly bees and other pollinators are in decline. Gardeners can make a difference to help reverse this trend. [125] The main thing that matters is that they get their share of nectar to fuel their busy lifestyles, [126] and this is where gardening can help them. A way to both positively impacts humans and pollinators can be implementing pollinator gardens. Including native flowers has shown to increase pollinators, and even protects bee populations against urbanization and landscapes that do not include flowers [127] . Small patches in urban landscapes that are diverse in flowers have been noted to match or even exceed wild landscapes when it comes to bees pollinating [128] . Areas like golf courses, cemeteries, community gardens as well as residential gardens are all areas in urban settings that could benefit pollinator diversity by implementing native flowers to the landscape [129] . Ornaments and accessories[ edit ] A classical urn at Palm House, the Belfast Botanic Gardens , Northern Ireland , as garden ornament There is a wide range of garden ornaments and accessories available in the market for both the professional gardener and the amateur to exercise their creativity for example sculptures, lights or fountains. These are used to add decoration or functionality, and may be made from a wide range of materials such as copper, stone, wood, bamboo, stainless steel , clay , stained glass , concrete, or iron. Examples include trellis , garden furniture , gnomes , statues , outdoor fireplaces , fountains , rain chains , urns , bird baths and feeders , wind chimes , and garden lighting such as candle lanterns and oil lamps . The use of these items can be part of the expression of a gardener's gardening personality. See also: Landscape architecture and Jupiter Artland Garden design is considered to be an art in most cultures, distinguished from gardening, which generally means garden maintenance. Garden design can include different themes such as perennial, butterfly , wildlife , Japanese , water , tropical , or shade gardens. In Japan, Samurai and Zen monks were often required to build decorative gardens or practice related skills like flower arrangement known as ikebana . In 18th-century Europe, country estates were refashioned by landscape gardeners into formal gardens or landscaped park lands, such as at Versailles , France, or Stowe , England. Today, landscape architects and garden designers continue to produce artistically creative designs for private garden spaces. In the US, professional landscape designers are certified by the Association of Professional Landscape Designers. [130]
